HEALTH ASPECTS

OF
CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL
WEAPONS
Report of a WHO Group of Consultants

WORLD HEALTH ORGANiZATION
GENEVA
1970

This report was completed on 21 November 1969 and submitted on 28 November 1969
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

©

World Health Organization 1970

Publications of the World Health Organization enjoy copyright protection in accordance with the provisions of Protocol 2 of the Universal Copyright Convention. Nevertheless governmental agencies or learned and professional societies may reproduce data
or excerpts or illustrations from them without requesting an authorization from the
World Health Organization.
For rights of reproduction or translation of \VHO publications in toto, application
should be made to the Division of Editorial and Reference Services, World Health
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. The World Health Organization welcomes such
applications.
This report contains the collective views of an international group of experts and does
not necessarily represent the decisions or the stated policy of the World Health Organization.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication
do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country
of territory or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturer's products does not
imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in
preference to others of a similar nature which are not mentioned. Errors and omissions
excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
PRINTED IN SWITZERLAND

CONTE~TS

Page
1. INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

2. COMPARISON OF THE WHO AND UNITED NATIONS REPORTS AND
THEIR CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . .

10

3. AIM AND SCOPE OF THE WHO REPORT

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

4. WORKING DEFINITIONS OF CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS REPORT . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

5. SELECTION OF CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL AGENTS AS MODELS
FOR QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENTS

12

6. BASES OF THE ESTIMATES OF CASUALTIES

13

7. LONG-TERM EFFECTS

14

8. SUMMARY . . . . . .

17

9. IMPLICATIONS FOR THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION AND
ITS MEMBER STATES

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

ANNEX 1. CHEMICAL AGENTS
Classification and definitions

23

A. LETHAL AGENTS.

25

Historical introduction .
Specification of toxicity of chemical
agents .
1. Lung irritants
(i) Phosgene
2. Blood gases
(i) Hydrogen cyanide
(ii) Cyanogen chloride

25

27
27
27
29
29
30

3. Vesicants.
(i) Mustard gas
4. ~erve gases
(i) Sarin
(ii) Agent VX
5. Other lethal chemical warfare
agents .
(i) Botulinal toxins.

B. INCAPACITATING AGENTS.
Introduction .
1. Bacterial enterotoxins and related
substances
(i) Staphylococcal enterotoxins .

D. ANTI-PLANT AGENTS

35
36
39

41
41
44

44
44
44

2. Psycho chemicals
(i) LSD
(ii) Agent BZ

C. HARASSING AGENTS (SHORT-TERM INCAPACITANTS)
Introduction . . . . . . . .
(i) CN . . . . . . . .

31

32

51
53

(ii) cs .
(iii) DM.

46
47
49

51
53
55

55

5

Page
ANNEX 2. BIOLOGICAL AGENTS
INTRODUCTION . .

60

A. VIRAL INFECTIONS
1. Arthropod-borne (arboviruses)
(i) Yellow fever . . . . .
(ii) Tick-borne encephalitis .
(iii) Japanese encephalitis . .
(iv) Dengue . . . . . . . .
(v) Venezuelan equine encephalitis. . . . . . . . . . .

61
61
62
63
64
65
66

(vi) Chikungunya
(vii) O'nyong-nyong
(viii) Rift Valley fever
2. Other viral infections
(i) Influenza
(ii) Smallpox

B. RICKETTSIAL INFECTIONS.
1. Typhus, epidemic
2. Rocky Mountain spotted fever:

70
70
71

3. Q fever

72

73
74
75

4. Brucellosis .
5. Typhoid fever

76
77

C. BACTERIAL INFECTIONS .
1. Plague . . .
2. Anthrax . .
3. Tularaemia .

66
67
67
68
68
69

73

D. FUNGAL INFECTIONS

78

1. Coccidioidomycosis . . .

78

E. THE PREDICTABILITY OF EPIDEMICS

79

1. Epidemiological considerations
2. Mathematical considerations . .

81

79
80

3. Danger of epidemic warfare as a
tactical weapon. . . . . . . .

ANNEX 3. BASES OF QUANTITATIVE ESTIMATES
A. HYPOTHESES CONCERNING DELIVERY, DISPERSION AND CONCENTRATION OF AGENTS .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .

...
1. Delivery .
2. Specification of dosage
3. Specification of toxicity and infectivity
4. Local meteorological factors· . .
5. Influence of local meteorological
factors on the effectiveness of an
attack with chemical weapons
6. Fall-out as a factor influencing
the incidence of attack .

84
84
85
87

88

84

7. Influence of the volatility of the
agent .
8. Possibility of more efficient
means of attack .
9. Conclusions on the feasibility of
an attack with chemical weapons
on urban areas
10. Implications for protection

91
91

92
93

89

B. HYPOTHESES CONCERNING BIOLOGICAL AGENTS

93

C. ESTIMATES OF NUMBERS OF CASUALTIES

95

D. POPULATION MODELS .

97

6

Page
ANNEX 4. MEDICAL AND PUBLIC HEALTH EFFECTS
OF ATIACK WITH CHEMICAL OR BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
INTRODUCTION . . . .

101

GENERAL PRINCIPLES

102

1. Problems in preparing for defence against an attack
2. Immediate problems in the event of an attack . .
3. Problems after the attack . . . . . . . . . . . .

103

EXAMPLES BASED ON HYPOTHETICAL SITUATIONS.

103

Assumptions on availability of health resources .

103

102
103

A. TULARAEMIA. . . . .

105

B. PNEUMONIC PLAGUE

107

C. NERVE GAS-VX . . .

110

ANNEX 5. SABOTAGE OF WATER SUPPLIES
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

113

CONTAMINATION BY THE TYPHOID BACILLUS . .

115

CONTAMINATION BY BOTULINAL TOXIN, TYPE A

116

CONTAMINATION WITH LSD .

117

PREVENTIVE MEASURES . . .

119

ANNEX 6. PSYCHOSOCIAL CONSEQUENCES OF CHEMICAL AND
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

121

POSSIBLE PSYCHOSOCIAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE THREAT OF
CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL WARFARE. . . . . . . . . . . .

122

POSSIBLE PSYCHOSOCIAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE USE OF CHEMICAL
AND BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS

126

CONCLUSION .

127

ANNEX 7. RESOLL:TIO~ 2454 A (XXIII)
OF THE GENERAL ASSEJ\ffiLY OF THE ul'.'ITED NATIONS
Question of General and Complete Disarmament . . . . . . . . . . .

129

Ai"''1'o'EX 8. RESOLUTIOI'I 'VHA. 20.54
OF THE TWE1'iTIETH WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY
Consideration of Resolution 2162 (XXI) of the General Assembly of the United
Nations: Question of General and Complete Disarmament . . . . . .

131

ANNEX 9. RESOLUTION WHA 22.58
OF THE TWENTY-SECOND WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY
Question of General and Complete Disarmament: Chemical and Bacteriological
(Biological) Weapons and the Consequences of their Possible Use. . . . . .

132

7

CONSULTANTS
Professor 0. V. BAROYAN, Director, Gamaleja Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology, Academy of Medical Sciences of the USSR, Moscow, USSR
Dr D. BLASKOVIc, Director, Institute of Virology, Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences,
Bratislava, Czechoslovakia
Dr K. EvANG, Director-General, The Health Services of Norway, Oslo, Norway
Professor R. B. FISHER, Department of Biochemistry, University of Edinburgh, Scotland
Professor L. HUISMAN, Department of Civil Engineering, Technological University,
Delft, Netherlands
Dr J. H. HuMPHREY, Head, Division of Immunology, National Institute for Medical
Research, London, England
Professor N. K. JERNE, Director, Paul Ehrlich Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Federal
Republic of Germany
Professor J. LEDERBERG, Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, Cal., USA
Professor A. M. LwoFF, Director, Institute of Scientific Research on Cancer, Villejuif,
France
Professor 0. MAALOE, Institute of Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
Professor I. MALEK, Institute of Microbiology, Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences,
Prague, Czechoslovakia
Professor M. MESELSON, The Biological Laboratories, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Mass., USA
Dr F. PASQUILL, Meteorological Office, Bracknell, Berks., England
Mr J. P. PERRY RoBINSON, Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI),
Sweden
Professor M. P. ScHUTZENBERGER, Faculty of Science, University of Paris, France
Professor V. W. SIDEL, Department of Community Health, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine ; Chief, Division of Social Medicine, Montefiore Hospital and Medical
Center, New York, USA
Dr Berhane TEOUME-LESSANE, 'Co-Director, Imperial Central Laboratory and Research
Institute, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Mr F. W. J. VAN HAAREN, Head, Laboratories of the Municipal Water Works, Amsterdam, Netherlands

Secretary to the Group :
Dr- M. KAPLAN, Special Assistant for Science, Office of the Director-General, WHO,
Geneva, Switzerland

8

1. INTRODUCTION
On 29 January 1969, the Secretary-General of the United Nations
requested the Director-General of the World Health Organization to
co-operate with the United Nations Group of Consultant Experts on
Chemical and Bacteriological (Biological) Weapons in the preparation of a
report on this subject. WHO was asked to provide such information as
the Organization considered useful for the United Nations report, which
was to be transmitted to the Eighteen-~ation Committee on Disarmament?
the Security Council and the General Assembly, if possible by 1 July 1969,
as requested in Resolution 2454 A (XXIII) adopted by the General Assembly
on 20 December 1968 (see Annex 7).
In order to help WHO in this task, the Director-General appointed a
number ·of consultants. In addition, liaison was maintained with the
Disarmament Affairs Division of the United Nations (which serviced the
Group of Consultant Experts appointed by the Secretary-General), the
Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), and the Pugwash
Organization, in order to avoid unnecessary overlap in their respective
contributions.
The possible development and use of chemical and bacteriological
weapons and their destructive potentialities have been matters of concern
to WHO for several years. In 1967, the Twentieth World Health Assembly,
on a recommendation of the WHO Executive Board, adopted a resolution
(see Annex 8) welcoming Resolution 2162 (XXI) of the United Nations
General Assembly and calling upon all Member States of WHO to exert
every effort to implement it. The Director-General was therefore glad to
meet the request to assist the United Nations in this matter, and in late
May 1969 an interim report was completed and forwarded to the SecretaryGeneral. Some of the information contained in the WHO submission was
incorporated into the final report of the United Nations Group of Consultant Experts on Chemical and Bacteriological (Biological) Weapons (hereafter referred to as "the United Nations report "), 2 which was released to
the public on2 July 1969 and transmitted to the Eighteen-Nation Committee
on Disarmament for discussion during the summer of 1969 before being
1

Renamed on 26 August 1969 the" Conference of the Committee on Disarmament".
United Nations (1969) Chemical and bacreriological (biological) weapons and the
effects of their possible use. Report of the Secretary-General, New York (United Nations
Publication, Sales No : E.69 .1.24).
2

9

considered at the Twenty-fourth session of the United Nations General
Assembly later in the year.
The relatively short period of time available for the preparation of the
WHO submission to the United Nations did not permit the health and
related scientific aspects of chemical and biological warfare to be covered
to the extent and in the depth merited by the importance of the subject.
For this reason and in pursuance of resolution WHA22.58 (Annex 9)
adopted by the Twenty-second World Health Assembly in July, 1969, a
further study of the problem was undertaken with a view to expanding
and revising certain sections of the interim report.

2. COMPARISON OF THE WHO
AND UNITED NATIONS REPORTS AND THEIR CONCLUSIONS
The United Nations report presents a comprehensive review of the
problem, and includes consideration of military aspects, plant and animal
diseases, ecology, and economic and security aspects, along with implications to human health. The report was intentionally written in a style that
would be easily understood by governments and by the lay non-specialist
reader, and it does not attempt to present highly technical information or
to provide a detailed analysis of public health considerations and medical
effects.
The present WHO report, on the other hand, attempts to deal with the
subject of chemical and biological warfare on a more technical level and to
make quantitative estimates ; it is addressed particularly to public health
and medical authorities. Thus the WHO report and the United Nations
report are complementary. Both arrive at essentially the same technical
conclusions, although inevitably there are some differences with respect to
the choice of emphasis and the assessment of possible effects on public
health, which reflect the differing approaches and technical orientations of
the groups that prepared the WHO and United Nations reports. It is
hoped·, therefore, that the present document will provide the Member
States of WHO with the technical information that will enable them to
appreciate more fully the public health implications of the possible use of
chemical and biological weapons.
The following main conclusions emerge from the WHO analysis :
1. Chemical and biological weapons pose a special threat to civilians. This
is because of the often indiscriminate nature of such weapons, and because
the high concentrations in which they would be used in military operations
could lead to significant unintended involvement of the civilian population
within the target area and for considerable distances downwind.
10

2. The large-scale or, with some agents, even limited use of chemical and
biological weapons could cause illness to a degree that would overwhelm
existing health resources and facilities.
3. Large-scale use of chemical and biological weapons could also cause
lasting changes of an unpredictable nature in man's environment.
4. The possible effects of chemical and biological weapons are subject to a
high degree of uncertainty and unpredictability, owing to the involvement
of complex and extremely variable meteorological, physiological, epidemiological, ecological, and other factors.

5. Although advanced weapons systems would be required for the employment of chemical and biological agents on a militarily significant scale
against large civilian targets, isolated and sabotage attacks not requiring
highly sophisticated weapons systems could be effective against such
targets in certain circumstances with some of these agents.
These conclusions are in harmony with the conclusions of the United
Nations Group of Consultant Experts on Chemical and Bacteriological
(Biological) Weapons and with the hope for further action to deal with
the threat posed by the existence of these weapons, as expressed by the
Secretary-General, U Thant, in the foreword to the United Nations' report.

3. AIM AND SCOPE OF THE WHO REPORT

The present report attempts to analyse the health effects of the possible
use of chemical and biological weapons on civilian population groups at
different levels of social and economic development, and the resulting implications for WHO and its Member States. The assessment is confined to
civilian populations, and no attempt is made to consider the purely military
aspects of the problem, except insofar as they may relate to civilian populations as possible targets for attack. The military aspects of chemical and
biological warfare are considered in the United Nations report and in a
report being prepared by SIPRI. The report also makes qualitative and
quantitative estimates of the health effects of selected chemical and biological agents employed under specified hypothetical conditions.

11

4. WORKING DEFINITIONS OF CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL
WEAPONS FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS REPORT
Chemical agents of warfare include all substances employed for their
toxic effects on man, animals, or plants. 1
Biological agents include those that depend for their effects on multiplication within the target organism, and are intended for use in war to
cause disease or death in man, animals or plants. 2
A lethal agent is one intended to cause death when man is exposed to
concentrations well within the capability of delivery for military purposes. 3
An incapacitating agent is one intended to cause temporary disease or to
induce temporary mental or physical disability, the duration of which
greatly exceeds the period of exposure. 4
A harassing agent (or short term incapacitant) is one capable of causing
a rapid disablement that lasts for little longer than the period of exposure. 4
Casualties are deaths or disabilities.

5.. SELECTION OF CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL AGENTS
AS MODELS FOR QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE
ASSESSMENTS
There are many chemical and biological agents that are potentially
suitable for use in war. A selection of some of the more likely candidates
for possible use as lethal, incapacitating and harassing agents has been made
1 This definition is intended to exclude chemicals now employed in warfare such as
high explosives, smoke, and incendiary substances (e.g., napalm, magnesium, and white
phosphorus) that exert their primary effects through physical force, fire, air-deprivation
or reduced visibility.
2 This definition therefore excludes toxins elaborated by some microbes (e.g., botulinal toxin and staphylococcal enterotoxin) when they are preformed outside the target
organism. In some discussions of chemical and biological weapons, such toxins are
classified as biological agents because the technology of their production resembles
that. of biological agents rather than that of chemical agents.
3 In lower doses, such agents can cause severe and sustained disability and certain
of them may act predominantly in this way when employed in combat.
4 No sharp line of demarcation can be drawn between lethal and incapacitating agents
used in chemical and biological warfare, because incapacitating agents can be lethal or
permanently disabling under certain circumstances (e.g., in the presence of malnutrition
or pre-existing disease ; in infants or the aged ; or when there is exposure to unusually
high doses, as in enclosed spaces or in close proximity to functioning chemical or biological
weapons). For similar reasons, no sharp demarcation line can be drawn between harassing agents and other anti-personnel chemical agents ; furthermore, harassing agents
may be used in war in conjunction with high-explosive, fragmentation or other weapons
to increase the lethal effectiveness of the latter-as distinct from their employment in
riot control in order to reduce injuries and to save lives.

12

for the purposes of this report, based on published information as well as
on theoretical considerations.
The chemical and biological agents described in Annexes 1 and 2 have
been selected to illustrate possible varieties of usage and effects : aerosol
exposure ; sabotage of communal water supply; quick or delayed action ;
essentially non-spreading and spreading types of infective disease ; vector
introduction. Qualitative descriptions are given for all of them, and a
number of representative types have been selected for quantitative assessments of the effects of their possible use.

6. BASES OF THE ESTIMATES OF CASUALTIES
The actions and toxicities of the chemical warfare agents considered are
reasonably well known. For many, there are generally agreed estimates of
lethal doses, although it shou,ld be kept in mind that often these are based
on assumptions concerning the relative susceptibility of different animal
species, and that susceptibility varies between individuals. The clinical
symptoms, the prognosis, and the general methods of treatment and prevention, if any, can be assessed from commonly available information.
The agents chosen for discussion as possible biological weapons are
those whose clinical effects are well known ; for some of them data on
approximate infective doses by inhalation or ingestion are also available,
either from published information about laboratory accidents or from
studies in human volunteers. However, little is known about the susceptibility of man to artificial aerosols of infective agents and about the
consequences of exposure to very high doses. This report is confined to a
discussion of known agents with a wide range ot infectivity and lethality.
Other agents could conceivably be developed. In spite of these uncertainties, it has been considered useful to attempt to predict the range of immediate effects of the agents dealt with in this report.
It is considered unlikely that the generaL conclusions reached in this
study would have been greatly modified if it had been possible to consult
classified information concerning chemical and biological agents, although
the assessments concerning the feasibility of their use in particular circumstances might have been made more realistic.
The estimates of casualties recorded in Tables 8 and 10, Annex 3, are
based on the number of individuals within a segment of a particular population group exposed to a given chemical or biological agent. The assumptions made and the variables taken into account are stated in Annex 3.
These assumptions deal with delivery, dissemination, and persistence of the
agents ; meteorological conditions ; effective concentrations and doses ;
human infective doses, attack and case fatality rates; and chemotherapy.
13

In the detailed analysis of hypothetical attack with tularaemia, pneumonic plague, and VX, the effects of the availability and use of health
facilities on the outcome are considered (Annex 4). Annex 5 describes the
possible effects of sabotage of a communal water supply with botulinal
toxin, the typhoid bacillus and LSD.
The estimates of casualties that are given in Annex 3 are applicable to
a surprise attack on an urban area that possesses no specific protection
against attack with chemical and biological agents, and in which the buildings are freely ventilated. It will be seen that even where the target area
is not very densely populated the effects of attack by a single aircraft could
create health problems of unprecedented magnitude.
It is certain that the scale and effectiveness of an attack (and also the
cost and feasibility) would depend upon military technology. To discuss
this aspect in any depth is outside the terms of reference of this report. A
limited attack on a civilian population using a pattern favouring the effectiveness of the weapons employed has therefore been chosen for consideration. In this way, it is hoped to illustrate the scale of the danger that could
arise from the use of such weapons. Similar results could be produced by
attacks on a larger scale if the circumstances were unfavourable for the
·
pattern chosen.
7. LONG-TERM EFFECTS
A few general considerations regarding the possible long-term effects of
chemical and biological agents should be noted. First of all, insufficient
knowledge is available to allow reliable predictions to be made. In many
cases, not much more can be done than to outline the various possibilities
needing further study. Beyond that, there are problems of evaluation that,
while still having a considerable technical component, also involve value
judgements that are clearly beyond the scope of this report. For example,
in comparison with the direct effects of a lethal chemical or biological
attack, a limited risk of long-term harmful effects to health may seem
relatively unimportant. On the other hand, the long-term effects of the
military use of agents that are not directly lethal may be considered more
important than their immediate effects. In the latter connexion it should
be kept in mind that non-military experience with disease-causing organisms
and chemicals present in the environment may not be a good guide to the
effects of those same agents under the quite different conditions and in the
generally higher doses involved in their military employment.
Possible long-term health effects of chemical and biological warfare
include (1) chronic illness caused by exposure to chemical and biological
agents (see specific descriptions in Annexes 1 and 2); (2) delayed effects in
persons directly exposed to chemical and biological agents ; (3) creation
14

of new foci of infective disease ; and (4) effects mediated by ecological
changes.
Delayed effects of direct human exposure
There is wide concern at present regarding the possibility that exposure
to both· infective and chemical agents already present in the human environment may cause harmful effects of a delayed nature. The effects of greatest
concern are :
(a) Carcinogenesis. Both viral and chemical agents have been strongly
implicated in the causation of cancer in man. Whether infection by any
of the viruses contemplated for possible military employment can be
carcinogenic in man is not at present known. A limited amount of information is available on the ability of certain classes of chemicals to induce
cancer, mainly in experimental animals. For example, many alkylating
agents have been found to be carcinogenic. Some compounds of military
interest, such as mustard, CS, and others, are alkylating agents. As
discussed in Annex 1, there is evidence suggesting a significant increase in
respiratory tract cancer among veterans exposed to mustard gas in the
First World War, and a large increase in such cancers has been reported
among workers engaged in the manufacture of mustard gas in the Second
World War.
(b) Teratogenesis. Certain chemicals and infective agents can cause
severe damage to the developing human foetus. Thalidomide and the
rubella virus are particularly well known teratogens. It is not known
whether any agents likely to be used in chemical or biological warfare
would have teratogenic effects at the doses likely to be received by pregnant
women in civilian populations under direct attack with or unintentionally
exposed to such agents during wartime. In this regard, it may be noted
that the use of 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid, an anti-plant chemical
that has been extensively used for both military and non-military purposes,
has recently been restricted by the United States Government because
experiments have shown that relatively high oral doses of this compound
are teratogenic in mice and rats.

(c) Mutagenesis. Until recent years little attention has been given to
the possibility that infectious diseases or chemicals in the environment
might cause detrimental alterations in the human genome. Several chemicals are known to induce such changes in experimental organisms and in
cultured human cells. Infection with certain viruses causes extensive
chromosome breakage in man, but it is not known whether any heritable
effect results. At least in the case of rubella it can be said that genetic
damage is not massive, although the induction of a lower but nevertheless
significant frequency of mutations cannot be excluded.
15

New foci of infective disease

As discussed in Annex 2, biological warfare would entail a risk that
new foci of infective disease might be established, either in human populations or in lower animals, including vector arthropods. This possibility has
been discussed in the United Nations report:
" A bacteriological (biological) attack might lead to the creation 0f
multiple and densely distributed foci of infection from which, if ecological
conditions were favourable, natural foci might develop in regions where
they had previolisly never existed or in areas from which they had been
eliminated by effective public health measures."
Effects mediated by ecological change

The possibility of the direct establishment of new foci of disease has
been referred to immediately above. New foci might also be established
as the result of ecological changes following the use of biological agents
infective for man and animals. This possibility has also been discussed in
the United Nations report :
" . . . the large scale use of bacteriological (biological) weapons might
reduce populations of susceptible wild species· below the level at which
they could continue to exist. The elimination of a species or group of
species from an area would create in the ecological community an empty
niche which might seriously disturb its equilibrium or which might be
filled by another species more dangerous to man because it carried a zoonosis
infection acquired either naturally or as a result of the attack. This would
result in the establishment of a new natural focus of disease."
As for anti-personnel chemical warfare, it can at least be said that the
massive dissemination of several chemical agents during the First World
War has not apparently caused any major long-term ecological damage in
Europe.
'
However; new foci of human disease may also be produced as a result
of the use of anti-plant agents. Extensive damage to the flora over large
areas may create conditions favouring the establishment of new vectors or
reservoirs of disease infective to man. One example of the way in which
damage to plant life can create new health hazards is cited in the United
Nations report : ·
" When a forest in a state of ecological equilibrium is destroyed by
cutting, a secondary forest regenerates, which contains fewer species of
plants and animals than were there originally, but larger numbers of those
species which survive. If secondary forest is replaced by grassland, these
changes are eve.n.more marked. If one or more ofthe animal species which
increases in numbers is the host of an .infection ,danger0us to man (a
zoonosis) then the risk of human infection is greatly increased. This is

16

exemplified by the history of scrub typhus in south-east Asia, where the
species of rat which maintains the infection and the vector mite are much
more numerous in secondary forest, and even more so in grassland, so
increasing the risk of the disease being transmitted to people as forest is
cleared."
Finally a profound long-term adverse effect on human health could
result from any major reduction in the quality or quantity of the food
supply. This could occur directly from the use of anti-crop agents or
indirectly through ecological changes that might result from chemical or
biological warfare.

8. SUMMARY
A. Qualitative considerations
Chemical and biological agents that might be considered for possible
use in warfare are described in Annexes 1 and 2, and pertinent assumptions
and other background factors are considered earlier in this text and in
Annexes 3, 4, and 5. Also of importance, although more difficult to assess,
are the possible long-term effects referred to in section 7, and the psychosocial consequences associated with the problem of chemical and biological
weapons (see Annex 6).
The rapid action of the lethal chemical agents (see Annex I) would
preclude any large reduction of mortality by specific treatment. Possible
protection by gas masks or shelters requires a highly disciplined and prepared population, a condition that is not fulfilled in most countries today,
and it would pose serious economic and psychosocial problems if such a
defence programme were to be implemented.
The outstanding characteristics of biological weapons (see Annex 2) for
potential use in warfare are the following :
(a) The large variety of biological agents and the possible combinations
available for such purposes.
(b) The possibilities for manipulating currently circulating strains of
micro-organisms for \Varfare purposes, by producing antigenically modified
or antibiotic-resistant types (tularaemia, plague, anthrax, influenza) that
would by-pass available prophylactic or therapeutic procedures. 1
(c) The unpredictability of the direct effects. A biological attack
intended to be highly lethal might prove relatively ineffective, whereas an
attack intended to be merely incapacitating might kill an unexpectedly
1
Mass immunizations would be of doubtful protective value because of the multiplicity of agents and strains that might be employed, quite a part from the adverse immunological side-reactions to be expected.

17

large proportion of the target population. Also, certain agents (anthrax,
coccidioidomycosis) could persist for long periods in a resistant spore
form, which could be spread over very large distances by wind carriage in
the course of time.
(d) The unpredictability of secondary effects such as the likelihood of
contagion and the danger that epidemics might be initiated. There is the
additional danger that epidemics might occur unintentionally through
escape of virulent strains being purposely sought in laboratories.

(e) Although biological agents themselves are easy to produce, complex
production and delivery systems are needed if even minimal reliance is to be
placed on the outcome of an attack, except perhaps where the intention is
simply to produce social disruption by a limited sabotage effort (e.g.,
the introduction of smallpox).
Of the above characteristics, (a) and (b) would favour the attacker,
whereas (c) and (d) would reduce the value of biological weapons from a
military point of view.
B. Quantitative estimates (Tables 8, 9 and 10, Annex 3)
1. Assessments have been made of the primary effects of possible smallscale airborne attacks on cities of 0.5-5 million population in industrially
developed and developing countries. The postulated mode of attack
consisted of one or a few bombers dispersing specific chemical or biological
agents along a 2-km line perpendicular to the direction of the wind. On
the basis of the particular assumptions employed, the following conclusions
have been reached :
(a) Of the known chemical warfare agents, only the nerve gases, and
possibly botulinal toxin, have a casualty-producing potential comparable
to that of biological agents.
(b) Under atmospheric conditions favourable to the attacker, an
efficiently executed attack on a city with 4 tons of sarin (requiring some
15-20 tons of weapons) could cause tens of thousands of deaths in an area
of about 2 km2 • Even in unfavourable conditions there could be thousands
of deaths. If 4 tons of VX were used in such an attack, the casualties would
not be appreciably greater in unfavourable meteorological conditions, but
in favourable conditions this small attack would affect an area of about
6 km2 and could cause anywhere between 50 000 and 180 000 deaths.
(c) If a suitably stabilized botulinal toxin or a fine aerosol of VX
(particles of 5p diameter) were developed and 4 tons were employed, several
hundreds of thousands of deaths could result because of the greater coverage
possible with such agents-12 km2 for botulinal toxin and 40 km2 for
monodispersed VX aerosol. A larger total weight of weapons, perhaps
18

2-3 times that needed for the agents in (b) above, would have to be used to
deliver these forms of botulinal toxin and VX.
(d) If a biological agent such as anthrax were used, an attack on a city
by even a single bomber disseminating 50 kg of the dried agent in a suitable
aerosol form would affect an area far in excess of 20 km2 , with tens to
hundreds of thousands of deaths. A similar attack with any one of a
number of other more labile biological agents could affect from 1 km2 to
more than 20 km2 , depending upon agent used, with tens to hundreds of
thousands of casualties and many thousands of deaths.
2. Limited sabotage of a communal water supply with the typhoid fever
bacillus, LSD, or a stable botulinal toxin, could cause considerable disruption and deaths in a large city (see Annex 5), affecting tens of
thousands of people.

3. Sabotage-induced or open attacks, causing the secondary spread of
epidemics of yellow fever, pneumonic plague, smallpox or influenza, might
under certain conditions ultimately result in many millions of illnesses and
deaths (see Annex 2).
4. The numbers of potential casualties and deaths recorded in this
report represent the possibilities arising out of a very small and limited
attack already well within the capabilities of a number of nations, with the
possibility that an ever-increasing number of countries will acquire similar
capabilities. With technologically advanced weapons and a larger scale of
attack, achievable without too much difficulty by militarily advanced
powers, the magnitude of destructiveness attendant upon the use of chemi.cal and biological weapons would be considerably increased.

9. IMPLICATIONS FOR THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
AND ITS MEMBER STATES
According to Art. 2 (c) of WHO's Constitution, WHO shall" ... furnish
appropriate technical assistance and, in emergencies, necessary aid upon
the request or acceptance of Governments ". The use of chemical and
biological weapons would unquestionably result in extensive health and
medical emergencies, including mass illnesses, deaths and epidemics, that
WHO might be called upon to help overcome. An attempt to assess the
magnitude of public health problems with respect to a minimal attack with
selected examples of agents (tularaemia, plague, VX) is contained in
Annex 4. This limited assessment, supported by analyses made in other
parts of this report and in the United Nations report, reveals the very large
and essentially wasteful effort that would be involved in undertaking
elaborate measures for defence against specific agents. Also, as pointed out
in Annex 6, such measures could well add credibility to projected fears of

19

annihilation in other countries. The resultant reciprocal fears between
nations might contribute in turn to a proliferation of chemical and biological weapons and an accelerated arms race, resulting in vastly increased
danger of accidental or deliberate release of chemical and biological agents.
Certain measures could, however, be taken within the framework of
existing needs and resources that would redound to the benefit of health
and preventive medical activities currently underway, and would not give
rise to fears of this kind. These measures include the improvement of
rapid detection and diagnostic facilities for air pollution and for communicable diseases, which would obviously be of value for health and
laboratory services in general ; improved medical management for natural
disasters, including decontamination procedures; and the wider use of
safety features in buildings (ventilation filters) and for communal water
supply systems (see Annex 5). While such measures might act as a partial
deterrent to irresponsible groups and might significantly reduce casualties
from a very small attack or from the spreading effects of an attack on a .
neighbouring country, they cannot be relied upon to afford major protection
to a country subjected to a determined attack.
As long as chemical and biological research directed specifically to
military use is continued, it will be considered necessary by some countries
to continue research towards detection of and protection against such
agents. This research could in itself point to agents more destructive than
those now existing. In view of the power of existing agents in conditions
favourable to their use and the possibility of developing new and even more
dangerous weapons, it is imperative to find ways of abolishing any presumed
need for this militarily orientated research as soon as possible.
It is therefore clear that in the last analysis the best interests of all
Member States and mankind in general will be served by the rapid
implementation of the resolutions on chemical and biological warfare
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly and the World Health
Assembly (Annexes 7 and 8), and by any additional steps that would
help ensure outlawing the development and use in all circumstances of
chemical and biological agents as weapons of war.
Finally, there is the possibility that WHO might be called upon by the
United Nations to help deal with allegations of use of chemical and biological weapons between nations and to assist in the limitation of chemical and
biological weapons, and disarmament. The technical resources of WHO 1
1 An example of such technical resources is the collection of epidemiological information on communicable diseases that has been made by WHO for many years, through its
serum banks and its surveillance programmes involving specific diseases. This information
provides an invaluable background and potential for determining changes in communicable disease patterns, as well as for obtaining knowledge of diseases already existing in a
community. Apart from its general epidemiological value, expansion in the accumulation
of such data could be very useful for investigating any possible future allegations of use
of biological weapons.

20

could contribute greatly to the resolution of many of the difficulties that
are associated with these problems and are now being discussed within the
framework of the the United Nations.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Group expresses its thanks and appreciation to the many staff members of
WHO who gave valuable help during the preparation of this report. Acknowledgement
is also made to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, the Pugwash
Organization, and the World Meteorological Organization for their collaboration and
for supplying much useful information.

21

ANNEX 1

CHEMICAL AGENTS
Classification and definitions

The number of substances that have been examined as candidate chemical warfare agents runs into hundreds of thousands. During the First
World War, virtually every known chemical was screened, and much of
the work done then was repeated during the Second World War; in addition, a high proportion of the new compounds that had been synthesized
or isolated from natural materials during the interwar years were examined.
Since the Second World War, the major laboratories engaged in such work
have probably been carrying out a systematic check on all compounds
whose properties suggest any utility in chemical warfare, however remote.
The requirements that must be satisfied by candidate chemical warfare
agents in respect of production cost and physical, chemical and toxicological
properties are severe, and the number of chemicals that have actually been
used in chemical warfare or stockpiled in quantity for such use is small,
probably not more than sixty. Of these, about two-thirds were used during
the First World War, when the battlefield fulfilled many of the functions
of modern chemical warfare proving grounds. Less than a dozen were at
all efficacious.
From a military point of view, chemical warfare agents have been
developed with three quite different tactical functions in mind :
(1) "lethal agents ",used either to kill an enemy or to injure him so severely

as to necessitate his evacuation and medical treatment ;
(2) "incapacitating agents ", used to put an enemy completely out of action
for several hours or days, but with a disablement from which recovery
is possible without medical aid ; and
(3) " harassing agents ", used to disable an enemy for as long as he remains
exposed.
The above classifications are not toxicological categories, for the effects
of a chemical warfare agent depend as much on the way it is used as on
its toxicological properties. If too much of an agent intended for harassment is used, it may kill or severely injure. Likewise, if a low concentration
23

TABLE 1. SOME PROPERTIES OF SELECTED CHEMICAL WARFARE AGENTS

cs

1

Sarin

vx

Hydrogen
cyanide

Cyanogen
chloride

Phosgene

Mustard gas

Botulinal
toxin A

BZ

2

Lethal agent
(nerve gas)

Lethal agent
(nerve gas)

Lethal agent
(blood gas)

Lethal agent
(blood gas)

Lethal agent
(lung irritant)

Lethal and
incapacitating
agent
(vesicant)

Lethal agent

Incapacitating
agent
(psychochemical)

Harassing
agent

Harassing
agent

Harassing
agent

Aerosol
or dust

Aerosol
or dust

Aerosol
or dust

I
Vapour

Spray

Aerosol
or dust

Aerosol
or dust

Large bombs

Large bombs

Mortars,
large bombs

All types of
chemical
weapon

Bomblets,
spray-tank

Bomblets,
spray-tank

1 000 kg

1 500 kg

1 500 kg

400 kg

500 kg

750 kg

750 kg

750 kg

100%

6-7%

Hydrolysed

0.05%

Soluble

?

Slightly
soluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

3-18 mg/m'

873 000
mgfm'

3 300 000
mgfm'

6 370 000
mg/m'

630 mg/m'

Negligible

Negligible

105 mg/m'

Negligible

0.02 mg/m'

Liquid
Liquid

Liquid
Liquid

Liquid
Liquid

Solid
Vapour

Liquid
Vapour

Solid
Liquid

Solid
Solid

Solid
Solid

Solid
Solid

Solid
Solid

Solid
Solid

Y.-1 h
Y.-4 h

1-12 h
3-21 days

Few minutes
Few minutes

Few minutes
Few minutes

Few minutes
Few minutes

12-48 h
2-7 days

1-2 days

1-16 weeks

1-4 h

Y.-4

Y.-1 h

2-8 weeks

> 5 mg-

> 0.5 mg-

> 2 000 mg-

> 7 000 mg-

> 1 600 mg-

> 100 mg-

4

All types of chemical weapon

5

1 000 kg

1 000 kg

1 000 kg

6

100%

1-5%

7

12100 mg/m 3

8 (a)
(b)

(a)
9 (b)

min/m'

min/m 3

11

100 mgmin/m'

10 mgmin/m'

12

1 500 mg/man

6 mg/man

---

KEY:

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

OM

Vapour

Vapour,
aerosol
or spray:

10

I

Vapour

Aerosol
or spray

3

(c)

CN

min/m 3

5 000 mgmin/m 3

-

h

min/m'
11 000 mgmin/m 3

min/m 3
3 200 mgmin/m 3

-

Common name
Military classification
Form in which the agent is most likely to be disseminated
Types of weapon suitable for disseminating the agent
Approximate maximum weight of agent that can be delivered
effectively by a single light bomber (4-ton bomb load)
6. Approximate solubility in water at 20'C
7. Volatility at 20'C
8. Physical state (a) at -10'C
(b) at 20'C

-

-

-

All types of chemical weapon

-

2 weeks for
CS1;
longer for CS2

-

-

min/m'

0.001 mg
(oral)

100 mgmin/m 3

5-15 mg/m'
concentration

1-5 mg/m'
concentration

2-5 mg/m'
concentration

1 500 mgmin/m 3

0.02 mgmin/m'

?

10 000 mgmin/m 3

25 000-150 000
mg-min/m'

15000 mgmin/m 3

4 500 mg/man

-

-

-

-

-

9. Approximate duration of hazard (contact, or airborne following
evaporation) to be expected from ground contamination :
(a) 10'C, rainy, moderate wind
(b) 15'C, sunny, light breeze
(c) -10'C, sunny, no wind, settled snow
10. Casualty-producing dosages (for militarily significant Injuries or
incapacitation)
11. Estimated human respiratory LCso (for mild activity: breathing rate
approx. 15 litreslmin)
12. Estimated human lethal percutaneous dosages

of a lethal agent is disseminated, its effects may be only incapacitating or
harassing.
The properties of some of the most important agents are summarized
in Table 1.

A. LETHAL AGENTS
A variety of tissue irritants and systemic poisons have been developed
into lethal chemical warfare agents. The former group includes the lung
irritants (asphyxiants) and the vesicants (blister agents) ; the latter includes
the blood gases and the nerve gases.
Historical introduction

Asphyxiants were first used during the First World War in the spring
of 1915 when a series of massive surprise attacks with chlorine caused many
thousands of casualties. As respirators became available, the trend was at
first towards finding agents more toxic than chlorine. This soon led to the
widespread use of phosgene, trichloromethyl chloroformate, and hydrogen
cyanide. The physical properties of hydrogen cyanide could not be brought
under sufficient control for practical use during the First World War, but
phosgene proved highly effective. Another trend was towards the development of substances such as chloropicrin whose physical and chemical
properties made their retention by respirators difficult. The third trend,
and certainly the most important one for the future development of chemical warfare, was towards the development of agents like mustard gas and
the arsenical vesicants that damage the skin, thereby circumventing the
protection of the respirator.
During the 1920s and 1930s, many new candidate chemical agents were
given serious consideration. These included such congeners of phosgene
and chloropicrin as bis(trichloromethyl) oxalate and the _tetrachlorodinitroethanes ; disulfur deca:fluoride ; a variety of arsenical vesicants, the
nitrogen mustards and the higher sulfur mustards ; metallic carbonyls ;
cadmium, selenium and tellurium compounds ; :fluoroacetates ; carbamates ;
and many others. Although a few of these appeared to have some advantages over existing chemical warfare agents in certain tactical situations, and
were eventually manufactured for possible war use, none exceeded phosgene
or mustard gas in general utility, and these two agents formed the bulk
of the stockpiles at the start of the Second World War, just as they had
at the end of the First.
A significant development in lethal agents came during the Second
World War with the secret manufacture by one of the belligerent nations
of the first series of nerve gases, the G-agents. These included tabun, sarin
and soman. Tabun had been discovered at the end of 1936, and pilot plant
25

production facilities were working when the war broke out. By 1945, massive quantities were available. It is much more poisonous than phosgene
and is quicker acting. In addition, it can produce casualties by penetration
of the eyes or skin, albeit at much higher dosages, as well as by inhalation.
After the war, when details of this nerve gas work were published, the
G-agents were developed further. Sarin emerged as the most attractive of
these for military purposes, and production methods were elaborated in a
number of countries to overcome the difficulties that had prevented its
manufacture on a large scale during the war.
In 1955, a further class of nerve gases was discovered in a commercial
insecticide laboratory. These new substances are now known as the
V-agents and their development has produced what appear to be exceptionally powerful chemical weapons.
Estimates of the respiratory lethal dose of phosgene in man are generally
around 50 mg, while that of sarin is around 1 mg, so that in terms of agent
toxicity the potentialities of chemical weapons increased by more than an
order of magnitude with the discovery of the G-agents. With the V-agents
there came another sharp increase, for the respiratory lethal dose of these
substances in man is thought to be of the order of 0.1 mg. But more important is their increased percutaneous toxicity : something like 5 000 mg of
mustard gas or 1 000-2 000 mg of sarin are probably needed to kill a man
through his skin, whereas with a V-agent such as VX perhaps only 5 mg are
needed. A person's skin had thus become nearly as vulnerable a target as
his lungs. As it is harder to protect a man fully against a contact hazard
than a respiratory one, and as the V-agents are persistent and so call for
elaborate decontamination measures (which need to be a great deal more
efficient than those for mustard gas) the V-agents represented not only an
increase in effectiveness in a given situation, but also an increase in the
number of military situations where chemical weapons might be effective.
It is since 1955 that it has come to be recognized that chemical weapons
are not historical leftovers but could be useful components of a modern
military arsenal.
At the present time, it is unlikely that any substance appreciably more
toxic than the V-agents has been developed into a practical chemical
warfare agent, even though a large number of such substances exist. They
include a variety of animal, vegetable and bacterial toxins, notably saxitoxin, tetrodotoxin, bobatrachotoxin, ricin, abrin and the toxins of Clostridium botulinum and Cl. tetani. Most of these are proteins of high molecular
weight that are expensive to extract and difficult to disseminate undetoxified.
Special circumstances might conceivably permit their use as chemical
warfare agents, but it is unlikely that they would ever be stockpiled in
preference to the V-agents. When their toxicology is better understood, it
is possible that their toxic principles may be incorporated into more tractable
substances, but this seems unlikely to happen in the near future.
26

Specification of toxicity of chemical agents

The precise specification of toxicity in terms of LD 50 and LCt50 is
explained in Annex 3.
It is important to understand that there is no sharp demarcation between
lethal and non-lethal doses : there is a gradual increase in the probability
of causing death as the dose increases. Precise specification of the relation
between this probability and the dose calls for experiments on large numbers
of animals. The necessary data are not always available for lower animals,
and are never available for man.
In consequence, often the only published information available is that
a particular dose may kill or incapacitate. This dose may be described as
the " lethal dose " or the " incapacitating dose ", but it is often impossible
to determine with any precision what proportion of those receiving this
dose would be killed or incapacitated. Since this report relies on published
information it can only be correspondingly imprecise.
1. Lung irritants

The lung irritants, sometimes also referred to as asphyxiants or choking
gases, are substances that cause physical injury to the tissues of the respiratory tract. The protective membranes lining the air passages may be
damaged, thus increasing susceptibility to microbial infection and possibly
leading to bronchopneumonia or similar diseases. In addition, the lung
capillaries through which oxygen is taken up into the circulation may be
damaged, and the resultant oedema may eventually prevent uptake altogether.
The majority of the lethal chemical agents employed during the First
World War were lung irritants, and it is estimated that they were responsible
for more than 80% of the deaths due to gas during the war. Since the
discovery of the nerve gases, the importance of lung irritants has greatly
declined. None the less, some of them are widely available commercial
chemicals and may still remain attractive as chemical warfare agents in
cases where nerve gases are not obtainable. This applies especially to
phosgene, the properties of which are reviewed below.
(i) Phosgene (carbonyl chloride, COC1 2)
Except in cold weather, phosgene is a colourless gas. In low concentrations, it has a rather sweet, not unpleasant odour resembling that of newmown hay, but it becomes more pungent and irritating in higher concentrations. Its vapour is three times as dense as air. It is rather rapidly decomposed into carbon dioxide and hydrogen chloride when dissolved in water,
and more slowly in moist air. It has many industrial applications, and in
some countries it is produced at a rate of more than 100 000 tons per year.
27

Toxicology

On inhalation, the initial effect of a dangerous quantity of phosgene is
a transient irritation of the mucous membranes, especially of the eyes and
respiratory tract. This may be too mild to warn the exposed person against
further inhalation, even though attack on lung tissue will already have
begun. Depending on the dosage, this may lead successively to bronchiolar
constriction, acute pulmonary inflammation, pulmonary oedema, emphysema, destruction of the alveolar epithelium, occlusion of the pulmonary
circulation by intravascular clotting and haemolysis, and bronchiolar and
bronchial necrosis (Tobias et al., 1949 ; American Industrial Hygiene
Association, 1968; Everett & Overholt, 1968). Symptoms are not generally
experienced for some hours after inhalation. Typically they begin with
increasing breathlessness, progressing through cough, dyspnoea, sense of
suffocation, thirst, vomiting, and pain in the chest. As the oedema builds
up in cases of severe poisoning, the symptoms culminate in cyanosis,
frothing at the mouth, extreme weakness, mental disorientation, coma,
convulsions, and death from acute cardiac failure (Wirth et al., 1967;
Everett & Overholt, 1968 ; von Oettingen, 1958).
Sublethal dosages will generally give rise to chronic sequelae. The
damaged lung tissue may take some time to heal : even a quite small dose
can produce a pneumonitis that is identifiable for several weeks or months
after exposure. The probability of microbial infection will be greatly
increased and the overall clinical picture may be complicated by chronic
bronchitis and bronchiectasis.
Exposure of the eye to high phosgene concentrations causes severe
conjunctivitis and, although at first the cornea appears to be unaffected,
corneal turbidity and visual disturbances may develop later (von Oettingen,
1958).
The respiratory LCt50 in man (see Annex 3 for explanation) is
estimated to be about 3 200 mg-min/m3 • Dosages of about 1 600 mg-min/m3
produce what is described as a " militarily significant incapacitation "
(US Department of the Army, 1963). In animal experiments, it has been
shown that repeated exposure to sublethal concentrations of phosgene is
not cumulative (Box & Cullumbine, 1947).
Therapy
It has been suggested that the initial biochemical lesion in phosgene
poisoning might be the acylation of certain essential lung constituents
(Tobias et al., 1949). It has also been suggested that the pulmonary oedema
may be of the neuroparalytic type, mediated by reflex action with resultant
sympathetic paralysis and severe pulmonary vasoconstriction (Ivanhoe &
Myers, 1964). These considerations, however, have not yet led to an
28

effective antidote for the poisoning, and the treatment of phosgene victims
remains essentially palliative and supportive.
In many patients who recover, there appears to be no permanent
residual disability (Sax, 1963). Recovery requires weeks to months (Thienes
& Haley, 1964).
Use as a chemical H'Gljare agent
Since phosgene can be easily liquefied under pressure, it can be used
conveniently to set up rapidly lethal concentrations of heavy gas over large
areas without the need for a large weight of weapons. In addition, quite
low field concentrations may produce effects that, although not fatal, are
nevertheless severely incapaciting. Its disadvantages lie in the delay before
it produces its toxic effects and its rather low toxicity compared with the
nerve gases. Its toxicity is almost certainly too low· to suggest its use in
preference to explosives or incendiaries in attacks on civilian targets
when the object of such attacks is anything other than terrorization. As
it has no percutaneous action, respirators provide complete protection
against its effects.

2. Blood gases
The designation " blood gas " is used to denote those lethal chemical
warfare agents that interfere with cell respiration ; it is an allusion to the
supposed mechanism of action of these substances, which is thought to
involve either a blockage of oxygen uptake from the blood, or a blockage
of the exchange of carbon dioxide between the blood and the tissues, and
between the blood and the air in the lungs.
The important members of the class are hydrogen cyanide and cyanogen
chloride, and their properties are reviewed below.
(i) Hydrogen cyanide (hydrocyanic acid, HCN)

Hydrogen cyanide, like phosgene, is a widely available commercial
product used in the manufacture of a variety of organic chemicals.
At room temperature, it is a highly volatile, almost colourless liquid.
It is completely soluble in water. Its vapour is less dense than air.
Toxicology
Although massive doses of hydrogen cyanide can produce percutaneous
intoxication, in warfare it ·would be used for respiratory effect; it is readily
absorbed into the circulation through the lungs.
At high respiratory doses, hydrogen cyanide may produce, without
warning, sudden loss of consciousness and prompt death from respiratory
arrest. With smaller but still lethal doses, the illness may be prolonged for
29

one or more hours. In these cases an immediate and progressive sensation
of warmth over the entire body, due to vasodilatation, with visible flushing,
is the first symptom ; this is followed by prostration, then nausea and
vomiting, often with headache, and then by difficulty in breathing, with a
sensation of tight bands around the chest ; and finally unconsciousness
supervenes, swiftly succeeded by asphyxial convulsions (Sollman, 1957;
Gleason et al., 1957).
The lethal effect of inhaled hydrogen cyanide varies greatly with its
concentration in the air, because the body rapidly destroys this poison.
When the concentration is 60 mg/m3 , a 60-minute exposure may cause no
serious symptoms. When the concentration is 200 mgjm3 death may follow
exposure for 10 minutes. When the concentration is 5 000 mg/m3 death
may follow exposure for 1 minute (Paulet, 1960; Manufacturing Chemists'
Association Inc., 1961).
Therapy

Two types of therapy for hydrogen cyanide poisoning are available :
the administration of nitrites, such as amyl nitrite, and the use of substances
that can destroy absorbed hydrogen cyanide in the very short time before
its effects have run their course. The latter compounds include thiosulfates,
which convert hydrogen cyanide to thiocyanate, a reaction that is catalyzed
by an enzyme present in the blood.
If therapy is begun in time, recovery from hydrogen cyanide poisoning
may be very swift.
Use as a chemical warfare agent

The attractions of hydrogen cyanide as a chemical warfare agent lie in
the extreme rapidity of its toxic effects if it can be disseminated in sufficiently high field concentrations. However, this is more difficult to achieve
than with phosgene owing to the low vapour and liquid densities of
hydrogen cyanide and its tendency to inflame when disseminated by explosive burst. As with phosgene, its low toxicity as compared with G and V
agents (see below) does not make it an obvious choice for attacks on
large civilian targets. Respirators can provide virtually complete protection
against it, although it is easier to saturate charcoal filters with hydrogen
cyanide than with most chemical warfare agents.
(ii) Cyanogen chloride (ClCN)
Like hydrogen cyanide, cyanogen chloride is a widely available commercial product, having applications as a fumigant and as an industrial
intermediate. It was in limited use as a war gas during the First World
War. When inhaled at a sufficiently high concentration it kills rapidly,
with a toxic action similar to that of hydrogen cyanide.
30

At room temperature it is either a gas or a highly volatile colourless
liquid. Unlike hydrogen cyanide, its vapour is strongly irritating to the
eyes and respiratory passages at low concentrations. It is readily decomposed by moisture into hydrogen cyanide and hydrochloric acid. Its liquid
and vapour densities are greater than those of hydrogen cyanide and it is
much less inflammable.
Toxicology

The signs and symptoms of its toxic effects are a combination of those
produced by hydrogen cyanide and a lung irritant. Its systematic action
first stimulates the respiratory centre and then rapidly paralyses it.
All concentrations of cyanogen chloride, from about 10 mg/m3 onwards,
produce immediate eye irritation and lachrymation. When it is inhaled,
cyanogen chloride causes in addition irritation of the nose and throat,
coughing, and tightness in the chest. Dizziness, increasing dyspnoea, convulsions, retching, and involuntary urination and defecation may then
occur. Unconsciousness is followed by respiratory failure and death
within a few minutes.
If these effects do not result in death, signs and symptoms of pulmonary
oedema may develop (persistent cough with much frothy sputum, pulmonary
rales, severe dyspnoea, and marked cyanosis (US Department of the Army,
1968).
The respiratory lethal dosage in man has been estimated to be about
11 000 mg-minjm3 ; on this basis, therefore, it is less than half as toxic as
hydrogen cyanide.
Therapy

Treatment of cyanogen chloride poisoning is palliative and supportive.
In severe cases the same methods may be used as for hydrogen cyanide
intoxication. In addition, it may be necessary to treat the eyes and respiratory airways as in the case of phosgene poisoning.
Use as a chemical wmfare agent

In chemical warfare, cyanogen chloride would be used in the same way as
hydrogen cyanide, over which it has the advantage that its tendency to
ignite is much lmver. Its lower toxicity is counterbalanced to a large extent
by its higher volatility, and the greater densities of its liquid and vapour.
3. Vesicants

The vesicants, or blister agents, are general tissue irritants with an
additional systemic action. Contact with skin tissues provokes blistering
in the affected region after some delay. Contact >vith the eyes causes more
31

rapid injury and leads to inflammation and possible temporary loss of
sight. Injury to the respiratory tract is similar to that caused by the lung
irritants described above.
The two main groups of vesicants are the dichloroarsine derivatives and
the so-called " mustards ". The latter are militarily more important as they
lack the initial irritant effect of the former group and have much less readily
detected odours, so that they are well adapted to insidious attack. All the
mustards contain at least two 2-chloroethyl groups, attached either to
thioether residues (the " sulfur mustards ") or to amine residues (the
"nitrogen mustards ").
Mustard gas was employed on a massive scale during the First World
War and was the most extensively stockpiled chemical agent of the Second
World War. Its properties are reviewed below.
(i) Mustard gas (Yperite, Lost: bis(2-chloroethyl) sulfide)
/CH 2 CH 2 Cl

s/CH 2 CH 2 Cl

Mustard gas is a colourless to amber oily liquid of neutral reaction,
freezing at 14oc when pure and boiling at 217oC with slow decomposition. At
high concentrations, it has a pungent odour resembling that of horseradish,
onions or garlic, much of which may be due to contamination with ethyl
sulfide and similar by-products of its synthesis. Toxic concentrations of
mustard gas can generally be smelt in the air, but may often not be sensed
by untrained persons (Dickel et al., 1952). It is only slightly soluble in
water, but may dissolve in organic solvents and fats. Chemically and
physically, it is a relatively stable substance. It gradually hydrolyses in
water and is quickly oxidized to its sulfoxide, a less toxic compound, by
chlorinated lime. These reactions may be incomplete under some circumstances : a mustard gas accident in. Germany in 1950 showed that soil that
had become contaminated by mustard gas, although thoroughly and repeatedly treated with water and chlorinated lime, still contained traces of
mustard gas 2 weeks after contamination (Dickel et al., 1952).

Toxicology
Mustard gas produces acute toxic effects only at supra1ethal dosages :
central nervous excitation leads to convulsions and rapid death. Under
field conditions without protection, the development of symptoms is usually
in the following order: no effects are felt immediately on exposure, except
to high concentrations, when there may be a tendency to sneeze, with or
without smarting of the eyes. Haemorrhage, especially from the nose, is a
common early symptom. The first definite symptoms generally occur in the
eyes between a half and three hours after exposure, starting with a feeling
32

of grittiness, progressive soreness and a bloodshot appearance, and proceeding to oedema and all the phenomena of acute conjunctivitis. There is
increased nasal secretion, sneezing, sore throat, coughing and hoarseness.
Within 4-16 hours after exposure, these symptoms become much more
marked and distressing: the eyes begin discharging and are very painful,
the nasal discharge is more purulent, and the voice is husky or suppressed.
Nausea, retching and vomiting, associated \Vith epigastric pains, occur in a
large proportion of subjects and may recur at frequent intervals for several
hours. In severe cases, they may become intense and prolonged. Diarrhoea
may set in, but is rather exceptional. The skin may begin to itch during
this period and skin rashes may show as a dusky erythema of the exposed
parts of the body and in the axilla and genitals, with blisters beginning to
appear. At the end of 24 hours all these symptoms may have increased
in severity, but death almost never occurs during the first day. During the
second day, the inflammation of the respiratory tract becomes conspicuous
in severe cases. The expectoration becomes abundant, mucopurulent,
sometimes with large sloughs of tracheal mucosa. This is complicated by
secondary infection of the necrotic respiratory membranes. Fever sets in,
with rapid pulse and respiration. The infection may terminate in bronchopneumonia, with death at any time between the second day and the fourth
week.
Mustard gas produces militarily significant effects over a wide range of
dosages. Incapacitating eye injury may be sustained at about 100 mgminjm3. Significant skin burns may begin at 200 mg-minjm3. The respiratory lethal dose is estimated at 1 500 mg-min/m3. 4-5 g of liquid mustard
gas on the bare skin may constitute a lethal percutaneous dosage, while
droplets of a few milligrams may cause incapacitation.
Blisters caused by mustard gas may heal in 2 or 3 weeks, and ulcerations
after 6 or 8 weeks. The blisters are often followed by a crop of furuncles
or pustules, generally on and around the burned area. The site of healed
mustard burns is hypersensitive to other trauma. Moreover, there seems to
be a general lowering of resistance after mustard gas poisoning, and' therefore
increased susceptibility to infections such as influenza, bronchitis, pneumonia and tuberculosis (Sollman, 1957). It is not uncommon for chronic
bronchitis and emphysema to outlast the acute poisoning (Wirth et al.,
1967).
Several instances of delayed keratitis of the eye have been ascribed to
mustard gas exposures some forty years earlier (Amalric et al., 1965).
The demonstration of mutagenic, carcinogenic and teratogenic actions
of the :mustards has recently aroused considerable interest. Botlpulfur and
nitrogen mustards have been shown' to be strongly mutagenic when tested
on Drosophila and other lower organisms (Auerbach, 1949). A teratogenic
action has been demonstrated in chickens and rats (Szirmai, 1966; Salzgeber, 1968). A carcinogenic action has been demonstrated with both sulfur
33

and nitrogen mustards after parenteral administration as well as after
inhalation in mice (Heston, 1953a, 1953b). In man, chronic exposure of
factory workers to mustard gas has also produced a marked excess of
pulmonary tumours within the lung at the same site as in mice and of the
same histologic type (Yamada, 1963). A tenfold increase (30 cases against
about 3 expected) in respiratory tract cancer (mainly lung) was observed in
such workers employed in Japanese factories during the Second World War
(Wada et al., 1968). An examination of the mortality data on 1 267 British
war pensioners who suffered from mustard gas poisoning in the 1914-18
war, and who were still alive on 1 January 1930, showed that almost all
(over 80%) had chronic bronchitis at that date. In subsequent years an
excess of deaths attributed to cancer of the lung and pleura was observed
amongst them (29 deaths found compared with 14 expected) (Case & Lea,
1955.) Furthermore, observations on American veterans of the First
World War suggest that the incidence of lung cancer was slightly increased
in men who had been subjected to mustard gas poisoning (Beebe, 1960).
Therapy
Treatment is palliative and supportive. The vesication may be treated
in much the same way as skin burns.
Use as a chemical warfare agent
In chemical warfare, mustard gas would probably be used to create
long-lasting contact hazards. For this purpose it would be disseminated
as a liquid spray to contaminate the ground, vegetation, and equipment.
During the travel of the spray, it would create a short-term air-borne skin
hazard as well. In warm weather there would be appreciable evaporation
of the spray fallout, and as the vapourhas little smell and its vesicant action
is delayed, it would be possible for anyone in the area to absorb a casualtyproducing dose without being aware of any exposure. This would rarely
be lethal, but as mustard gas can produce damaging effects at dosages as
low as 100 mg-minjm3 , this insidiousness has considerable military attractions. Airborne concentrations of mustard gas that would very probably
be lethal are unlikely to be set up except by weapons disseminating aerosols
(Vocci et al., 1963).
Occupation of ground contaminated with mustard gas at a density of
10-60 mgjm2 would be hazardous without protection or decontamination
measures. Yet the acute hazard would be less severe than with VX (see
below) even at these higher densities, because the lethal percutaneous
dosage of mustard gas required is so much greater and because the toxic
effects are generally milder and more delayed.
34

4. The nerve gases
The designation " nerve gas " IS used to denote organophosphorus
compounds that inhibit tissue cholinesterase in man at small dosages ; it
is an allusion to the mode of action of these substances, which consists
essentially of a disruption of nerve impulse transmission. At the present
time, two families of nerve gas are important for military purposes : the
G-agents, consisting of alkyl esters of methylphosphonofiuoridic acid or
of dialkylphosphoramidocyanidic acids, and the V-agents, consisting of
alkyl esters of S-dialkylaminoethylmethylphosphonothiolic acids. It will
be noted that these two families theoretically include several hundred
different chemical substances.
Chemically and toxicologically, the nerve gases are similar to many of
the commercial organophosphorus pesticides and, while information on
severe nerve gas poisoning in man is rather limited, there are considerable
data on human exposure to some of these pesticides. Insecticides, such as
tetraethyl pyrophosphate (TEPP) and parathion, have caused a number of
fatalities as a result of misuse or accidental poisoning. In Japan there were
more than 6 000 cases of parathion poisoning >vithin a five-year period
(Namba & Hiraki, 1958) and the use of this compound and of some other
organophosphorus insecticides of similar toxicity has been curtailed or
abolished in several countries.
There is no shortage of data in the unclassified literature on what appear
to be the most attractive of the G-agents for military uses. Thus, detailed
information is available on the toxicological, chemical and physical properties and methods of preparation of the follow-ing :
ethyl N,N-dimethylphosphoroamidocyanidate
isopropyl methylphosphonofiuoridate
1,2,2-trimethylpropyl methylphosphonofiuoridate

(tabun, GA)
(sarin, GB)
(soman, GD)

There is rather less information on certain other G-agents that are
believed to be attractive as chemical warfare agents, notably on cyclohexyl
methylphosphonofiuoridate (GF). The properties of sarin are reviewed
below.
On the V-agents, there is much less information. Their general structural
formula as published in the literature is RO.CH 3P(O).SCH 2CH2 NR'R",
where R, R' and R" are alkyl groups. What has not yet been published
are the individual structures of those members of this large family that are
regarded as most attractive by the armed forces, so that substances like
VE, VM and VX are known only by code names.
Of the individual V-compounds for which data on toxicological, physical
and chemical properties are to be found in the unclassified literature, one
that appears to be particularly suitable for use as a chemical warfare agent
is that in which R is an ethyl group, and R' and R are methyl groups.
1
'

35

According to Julea & Popa (1966), this compound is referred to as VX;
its properties are reviewed later.
(i) Sarin, GB: (isopropyl methylphosphonojluoridate)
0
11/F

CHaP""OCH(CH h
3

Sarin appears to be one of the most important of the G-agents. When
pure, it is a colourless liquid that is volatile at ordinary temperatures,
giving off a colourless and odourless vapour. The freezing point is -56°C
and the boiling point 147°C.
.
Sarin is miscible with water in all proportions. In strongly alkaline
solutions of pH 12 or higher, it is hydrolysed extremely rapidly, yielding
non-toxic products, while between pH 4 and 7 the hydrolysis takes place
at such a slow rate as to be of little practical significance, for example, in
decontamination procedures.

Toxicology
Sarin, like all nerve gases, may be absorbed through any body surface.
When dispersed as a vapour or aerosol, or adsorbed on dust, it is readily
absorbed through the respiratory tract or conjunctivae. The route through
which absorption is most rapid and complete is the respiratory tract.
Signs and symptoms of nerve gas poisoning as listed by Grab (1956) are
given in Table 2. The time course of their appearance varies with the
degree and route of absorption. After inhalation, bronchoconstriction and
respiratory distress appear before pronounced symptoms involving the
gastro-intestinal tract develop.
People with a history of infections of the upper respiratory tract would
probably show more pronounced interference with respiration. Exposure
to sarin vapour concentrations that were just lethal would probably result
in death within one to a few hours and exposure to several times the lethal
concentration would probably be fatal within several minutes to half an
hour (Grob, 1956; Grob & Harvey, 1958).
It is possible that persistent paralysis-a neurotoxic effect due to demyelination of axon sheaths seen in poisoning by some organophosphorus
compounds-might develop among victims surviving many times the lethal
dose of sarin. Although this effect has not been reported in man, it has been
experimentally produced with sarin in hens, a species similar to man in its
response to the neurotoxic effect of organophosphorus compounds (Davies
et al., 1960).
In volunteers, a single oral dose of0.022 mgjkg produced mild symptoms
and an additional.0.008 mg/kg administered within 8 hours resulted in
36

TABLE 2. SIGNS ANd SYMPTOMS OF NERVE-GAS POISONING*
Site of action

Muscarinic
Pupils
Ciliary body
Conjunctivae
Nasal mucous
membranes
Bronchial tree
Sweat glands

Signs and symptoms

Following local exposure
Miosis, marked, usually maximal (pin-point), sometimes unequal
Frontal headache; eye pain on focusing ; slight dimness of vision ;
occasional nausea and vomiting
Hyperaemia
Rhinorrhaea; hyperaemia
Tightness in chest, sometimes with prolonged wheezing expiration suggestive of bronchoconstriction or increased secretion;
cough
Sweating at site of exposure to liquid

Nicotinic
Striated muscle

Muscarinic
Bronchial tree

Gastrointestinal
Sweat glands
Salivary glands
Lachrymal glands
Heart
Pupils
Ciliary body
Bladder

Fasciculations at site of exposure to liquid

Following systemic absorption
Tightness in chest, with prolonged wheezing expiration suggestive
of bronchoconstriction or increased secretion; dyspnoea, slight
pain in chest; increased bronchial secretion; cough; pulmonary
oedema ; cyanosis
Anorexia; nausea; vomiting; abdominal cramps; epigastric and
substernal tightness(? cardiospasm) with "heartburn" and eructation; diarrhoea; tenesmus; involuntary defecation
'
Increased sweating
Increased salivation
Increased lachrymation
Slight bradycardia
Slight miosis, occasionally unequal; later, more marked miosis
Blurring of vision
Frequency; involuntary micturition

Nicotinic
Striated muscle

Sympathetic ganglia

Central nervous system

*

Easy fatigue; mild weakness ; muscular twitching ; fasciculations ;
cramps; generalized weakness, including muscles of respiration,
with dyspnoea and cyanosis
Pallor; occasional elevation of blood pressure
Giddiness; tension ; anxiety; jitteriness; restlessness ; emotional
lability; excessive dreaming; insomnia; nightmares; headache;
tremor; apathy; withdrawal and depression ; bursts of slow waves
of elevated voltage in EEG, especially on hyperventilation; drowsiness ; difficulty in concentrating ; slowness bf recall; ,confusion ;
slurred speech; ataxia; generalized weakness; coma, with absence
of reflexes ; Cheyne-Stokes respiration ; convulsions; depression
of respiratory and circulatory centres, with dyspnoea, cyanosis,
and fall in blood pressure.

After Grab (1956).

moderate symptoms. The estimated oral lethal dose was 0,14 mg/kg (Gob
& Harvey, 1958).
Sarin splashed in the eye may be lethal at about 0.05 mg/kg (Kondritzer
et al., 1959).
The toxicity of sarin applied to the skin has been variously estimated at
100-200 mg/man (FOA, 1967) and 1 700 mgjman (US Department of the
Army, 1963). Sarin vapour is not appreciably absorbed through the skin
37

(Grob & Harvey, 1953) and only to a limited extent through the eyes
(Albanus et al., 1966). Respiratory LCT50 estimates for sarin vapour or
aerosol include figures of 50-100 mg-min/m3 (FOA, 1967) and, for breathing
rates of about 15 litres per minute, 100 mg-minjm3 (US Department of the
Army, 1963). Increased lethality of sarin, particularly through the skin,
was demonstrated in experimental animals when they were kept at an
elevated environmental temperature (38°C) (Craig et al., 1959).
Therapy

The effects of both nerve gases and organophosphorus insecticides have
been related to the inhibition of tissue cholinesterases at synaptic sites, and
to an accumulation of excessive amounts of acetylcholine in effector organs.
This is responsible for the production of the muscarinic, nicotinic and
central nervous system symptoms described in Table 2. Deaths from sarin
poisoning can be attributed to respiratory and circulatory failure.
The inhibition of acetylcholinesterase rapidly becomes more or less
irreversible and the effects of repeated daily exposure are cumulative to
some extent.
Because the originating biochemical lesion in nerve gas poisoning has
been identified, it has become possible to elaborate therapeutic procedures
from first principles, and many of these procedures are comparatively
effective.
The toxic effects of accumulating acetylcholine may be partly countered
with anticholinergic drugs, 1 such as atropine, and for this purpose individual
soldiers of the more sophisticated modern armies are equipped with autoinjectors for self-administration of the drugs as soon as the effects of nerve
gas poisoning begin to be felt.
Anticholinergic drugs are not capable of reactivating inhibited acetylcholinesterase. They can counter only the muscarinic effects of nerve gas
poisoning. Reactivators are available, however, that can counter some of
the nicotinic effects, including the paralysis of the respiratory muscles. In
the absence of such reactivators, the only way of maintaining respiration
is by the use of positive-pressure artificial respiration. At present, the best
reactivators are certain oximes, particularly salts of pralidoxime iodide and
obidoxime ; some armies include these in their autoinjector atropine preparations. Their principal drawback lies in their inability to penetrate the
blood-brain barrier, so that they are unable to counter the effects on the
central nervous system. In addition, with most nerve gases, the inhibited
acetylcholinesterase undergoes a chemical change after taking up a nerve
1 Anticholinergic drugs are generally highly poisonous substances in their own right.
As the dosages in which they are effective against nerve gas poisoning are usually higher
than their own toxic dosages, they can be employed as antidotes only with considerable
care and expertise.

38

gas residue, which greatly impedes its reactivation by oximes. With some
agents, such as soman (but not sarin or VX), this change may occur so
rapidly that it becomes impossible to administer oximes in time. Atropine
and prolonged artificial respiration then become the only possible therapy
at present available.
If exposure to many times the lethal dose has occurred, or if treatment
has been too long delayed, death may occur in spite of all efforts to save
the patient. Even if recovery from sarin poisoning occurs, irreversible
central nervous system damage can ensue because of anoxaemia.

Use as a chemical warfare agent
In chemical warfare, sarin could be used to create short-term respiratory
hazards. In warm climates it is sufficiently volatile for lethal vapour concentrations to be readily attainable, but the airborne concentration would
generally be increased by disseminating it as a rapidly evaporating aerosol.
This can be done quite simply by including a heavy explosive charge in the
weapon. Weapons based on this principle have apparently been developed
for almost all delivery systems. Any sarin that is not immediately vaporized or aerosolized would soon precipitate to form a contact hazard on the
ground, and thereafter evaporate, at a rate determined mainly by the
ground temperature, to reinforce the respiratory hazard.
(ii) Agent VX
VX appears to be the most important of the V-agents. These were first
prepared in 1955 as candidate insecticides and were a logical development
of the Amiton-type insecticides described by Ghosh & Newman (1955).
The unclassified literature contains little information on the V-agents
themselves, but it is reasonable to assume that their toxicological properties
are qualitatively similar to those of the dialkyl S-dialkylaminoethyl phosphorothiolate esters (the Amiton-type insecticides). Most of the accessible
data are contained in a study by Aquilonius et al. (1964) of the toxicology
of a group of V-agents, Amiton derivatives and "Tammelin esters".
Ethyl S-dimethylaminoethyl methylphosphonothiolate 1 (referred to as
VX by Julea & Popa (1966) was found by Aquilonius et al. (1964) to be
the most toxic of the compounds they studied and considerably more toxic
than sarin, the intraperitoneal LD 50 values in mice being determined as
0.05 and 0.45 mgjkg respectively. They announced that in future papers
the mode of action following various routes of administration would also
be described " with special regard to percutaneous absorption ". Since
1

/OCH2CH3
CHaP(O)"-scH CH N(CHa)
2

2

2

39

then, however, no publication has been traced in the unclassified literature
on this subject.
VX is a non-volatile liquid at room temperatures, with a boiling point
of 80°C at 0.06 mm Hg (Tammelin, 1957). ·Its solubility in water is between
1% and 5% at room temperature. The V-agents as a class a~e more resistant
to hydrolysis than sarin, particularly in alkaline solution (FOA, 1967}:
Toxicology

The toxicology of the V-agents is essentially the same as that of other
nerve gases (see sarin). It may be noted however that, in contrast to sarin,
they are unaffected by phosphoryl phosphatases (Tammelin, 1958), the
enzymes responsible for the hyqrolysis of many organophosphorus compounds in the body, and display a sljghtly slower onset of symptoms
(Aquilonius et al., 1964). In addition, .they generally cause gastro-intestinal
pains preceding bronchoconstriction as the initial symptom, in contrast to
the G-agents (FOA, 1967).
. FOA (1967) give the following tanges of figures for the estimated lethal
dosage of the V-agents in man: 2-10 mg ofliquid on the skin for the dermal
absorption route, and 5-10 mg-minjm3 of aerosol in the air for absorption
'
through the respiratory tract.
. Therapy

The therapy of V-agent poisoning is .essentially the same as for the
G-agents (see sarin above).
Use· as a chemical warfare agent

, In chemical warfare, VX could be used to create long-term contact
hazards by contamination of grou~d, vegetation and equipment, or to
create short-term respiratory hazard~ .. ,for the latter, it would have to be
disseminated as a fine aerosol, as, it lacks the volatility to provide a lethal
field concentration of vapour. A coarse liquid. spray would be highly
effective, for ground contamination. or ·skin attack, but. would not be a
re~piratory hazard unless the spray included very fine droplets. It can be
assumed that appropriate weapon~ ,have been developed for the different
pu~po~es.
.. : •
.
., ,
.,;A: ,fine. aerosol .of VX would probably not be effective in skin attack:
thf; ,sp1all dropl~t size would mean, a poor impaction efficiency on the skin,
as compared with the larger droplets contained in a spray.
Occupation of ground contaminated with VX at a density of 0.5-5 mg/m2
would be extremely hazardous without protective clothing or decontamination measures.
40

5. Other lethal chemical warfare agents

Two other groups of chemical agents of potential military application
should be mentioned ; both of these attracted considerable attention during
the Second World War.
The first is the family of aryl carbamates structurally related to' the
alkaloid physostigmine. They are anticholinesterase agents, some of which
have toxicities comparable to those of the G-agents. The fact that they
are solids and that chemically they are not too stable greatly detracts from
their :Use as chemical warfare agents, and they are mentioned here only as
examples of easily synthesizable chemicals embodying the toxic principle
of a poisonous naturally occurring substance. One of the more extensively
studied members of the family is 3-diethylaminophenyl N-methylcarbamate
methiodide, whose inhalation toxicity in man has been estimated at around
100 mg-minjm3 .
The second is the group of naturally occurring, toxic proteins of high
molecular weight, exemplified by ricin and botulinal toxin. The shortcomings of the group as chemical 'varfare agents have been mentioned
earlier; but nevertheless these two in particular have military advantages
that are not negligible.
Ricin is potentially available on a large scale as a by-product of castor
bean processing. Comparatively successful weapons were developed
during the Second World War to disseminate it as a chemical warfare agent.
The human lethal dosage of aerosols of the crude toxin has been estimated
to be about the same as that of sarin; for a more pighly purified material
it would not be unreasonable to expect a toxicity exceeding that of VX.
While a nation that could produce nerve gases in bulk would probably not
be interested in ricin as a chemical warfare agent, particularly as its toxic
effects are delayed, a nation that lacked such a manufacturing capability
might well be attracted by it. Detailed information has recently become
available in the patent literature, both on production methods for extracting
it in a form explicitly suited to chemical warfare and on the design of
weapons for its dissemination.
The botulinal toxins, being among the most toxic substances known to
man, have long been regarded as potential chemical warfare agents. Their
properties are reviewed below.
(i) Botulinal toxins

The toxins of Clostridium botulinum are the causative agents of botulinal
food poisoning (botulism).
Cultivation of the bacterium (a sporulating saprophyte) and purification
of the neutotoxic proteins extractable from the culture are straightforward
processes and make it possible to produce toxins on a fairly large scale in
bacteriological laboratories.
41

Every strain of Clostridium botulinum produces one specific antigenic
neurotoxin which can be isolated, identified, andlabelled (A, B, C, D, E
or F); type A has been crystallized. The toxins are chemically and antigenically different. The molecule of type A toxin appears to comprise a
single polypeptide chain. Type A toxin crystals are white and odourless,
of unknown taste.
The botulinal toxins are destroyed by boiling for 5 to 10 minutes; they
are detoxified by formaldehyde and precipitated by their specific anti-toxin
(Lamanna & Carr, 1967). In cold, stagnant water, they are stable for a
week. In food, they may persist a long time, provided air is excluded
(US Department of the Army, 1965).
Toxicology

Botulinal toxins can cause poisoning following absorption through any
mucous membrane surface, e.g., the digestive tract or bronchial or conjunctival mucosa; only healthy normal skin prevents absorption. The
lethal doses are generally largest by the oral route, smaller by inhalation,
and smallest by parenteral administration. In the case of oral administration, a large fraction of the ingested toxin becomes ineffective as a consequence of enzymatic breakdown (Lamanna & Carr, 1967). Nevertheless,
the mortality rate in most outbreaks of botulism is high (estimated by
Dreisbach, 1969, as being approximately 60% and by Wirth et al., 1967,
as being 15-90%).
The basic process of poisoning is believed to be the same for all types
of toxin after their absorption. To be effective, the toxins must reach the
circulatory system, which carries them until they find their specific receptors
at the neuromuscular junction.
Once there, they produce an effect that renders the junction incapable
of teleasing acetylcholine in quantities sufficient to evoke a contraction of
the muscle fibre. Nerve conduction per se is not impaired in peripheral
nerves by the toxin, and the postsynaptic excitability of muscle fibres
remains normal. These facts have been established in man (Tyler, 1963).
The consequent muscular weakness is observed in all voluntary muscles
innervated by peripheral nerves that are cholinergic in character, both
preganglionic and postganglionic autonomic fibres being affected, and in
skeletal muscles innervated.by somatic nerves. Evidence for a central effect
of the toxin is not yet conclusive (Lamanna & Carr, 1967), although a
specific and primary action at the autonomic ganglia is believed by some
to be of the greatest importance.
The symptomatology in man following inhalation of botulinal toxin
aerosols has not been described, but that following ingestion is well reported.
Early signs and symptoms appear usually within 6-48 hours, but sometimes later. The most consistent are a combination of extreme weakness,
42

malaise, dry skin, dilated and unresponsive pupils, blurred vision, dry
coated tongue and mouth, and dizziness when upright. As the patient
becomes worse, he develops progressive muscular weakness with facial
paralysis, and weakness of arms, legs and respiratory muscles. He may
die of respiratory failure unless artificial respiration is applied. There may
be associated cardiac arrest or complete vasomotor collapse.
For the type A toxin, the intraperitoneal injection ofless than 3 X 10-8 mg
has been shown to kill a mouse. This extraordinary toxic potency would
account for the capacity of the protein to act as an oral poison in spite of
its sensitivity to proteolytic enzymes. For man, the fatal oral dose may
be 1 000 times, and for monkeys 750 times, the parenteral dose. Man
is believed to be the most sensitive of known species ; the estimated
oral lethal dose is 7 000 mouse intraperitoneal lethal doses, and the estimated respiratory lethal dose is 7 such mouse units (Lamanna & Carr, 1967 ;
Herrero et al., 1967). However, until quantitative studies have been made
to define a realistic basis of comparison, available data are insufficient to
make a scientific judgement of the true LD 50 for man (Lamanna, 1959).
Further estimates of the human lethal respiratory dose have recently
appeared in the literature; one such estimate for type A toxin is 0.0003 mg
(Markkula, 1967), corresponding to an inhalation dosage of 0.02-0.05
mg-minjm3 •
In the case of rhesus and squirrel monkeys, very steep dose-response
curves have been obtained in toxicity determinations by intravenous injection of the type A toxin (Herrero et al., 1967). For the significance of this
finding, see Annex 3, p. 85.
Therapy

The botulinal toxins elicit an immune response from the body, and
toxoid immunoprophylaxis is feasible. Polyvalent antisera (at least against
types A, B, C, D and E) are also available, either for prophylactic use or
for administration after intoxication. With suitable supportive treatment
(Hill & Chesney, 1966; Wirth et al., 1967), surviving patients generally
recover in about a week.
Use as chemical

wa~fare

agents

Botulinal toxins have been openly discussed since before the Second
World War as potentially among the most dangerous substances for use in
chemical warfare. Although highly toXic, it is not at all certain that they
have in fact been developed as chemical warfare agents, in view of their
chemical and physical instability. Such difficulties are probably not insurmountable and, with continued research on this problem, their dissemination as aerosols or through communal water supplies could become feasible,
if it is not so already. (Estimates of effects by both routes, aerosol and
43

water carriage, are given in Table 9, Annex 3, and Annex 5.) Preventive
immunization is feasible, but therapeutic measures could be applied only
to very small numbers of exposed individuals with little effect on the overall
mortality that could be expected. Decontamination of the environment
would be required, and all food would have to be heat sterilized before
consumption.

B. INCAPACITATING AGENTS

Introduction
The idea of" incapacitating" agents is an old one, and the possibilities
of such substances for waging a " humane " war have been discussed at
least since the nineteenth century. Only recently, however, have compounds
been discovered that are potentially suitable for this purpose. Although a
great number of chemicals exist that can produce a non-fatal and prolonged
but temporary incapacitation under controlled conditions, very few, if any,
can be expected to do so in extensive conflict situations. Apart from the
usual conditions that govern the selection of compounds for possible use
in chemical warfare, two other difficulties are involved. First, the agent
must be one whose incapaciting inhalation dosage is sufficiently far removed
from the lethal inhalation dosage to make it unlikely that fatalities will
occur, even in the immediate vicinity of the disseminating device. Secondly,
the agent must be one that will qisable groups of people to an extent that
is both significant from the military point of view and predictable. Neither
of these difficulties appears to have been fully overcome in the two groups
of substances at present available that seem to be most suitable for use as
incapacitating agents.

1. Bacterial enterotoxins and related. substances
Many bacterial toxins can produce acutely incapacitating effects at
dosages that are far below their lethal ones. Typical effects of this type
are pyrexia, emesis, and diarrhoea: these may occur with sufficient violence
and persistence to immobilize a subJect completely for periods of several
hours. However, although certain toxins are capable of producing these
effects in man at microgram dosages, a few milligrams of the same substances
have killed laboratory animals, and it is thus to be expected that some
fatalities would result from their military use. But this. consideration may
be outweighed by the comparative cheapness, ready availability, and speed
of action of the toxins. The properties of one group are reviewed below.
(i) The staphylococcal enterotoxins
· ·The acutely incapacitating nature of staphylococcal food poisoning
suggests the use of staphylococcal enterotoxins in chemical warfare. It is

44

known that the effects of their use in aerosol form have been studied in
experimental animals in military chemical warfare establishments. The
subject of the staphylococcal enterotoxins has recently been reviewed by
Lamanna & Carr (1967).
Staphylococcal cultures generally contain a considerable number of
biologically active compounds, which may sometimes include one or more
types of enterotoxin. Four distinct antigenic types of the enterotoxin have
been described (t; pes A, B, C and D), and it is likely that others will be
discovered as more staphylococcal strains are screened; a given strain may
provide more than one antigenic type of toxin (Casman et al., 1963).
Staphylococcal enterotoxins have been shown to be simple proteins.
The most extensively studied is the type B toxin (SEB) which, although not
yet crystallized, has been purified (Schantz et al., 1965) to a stage permitting
a complete aminoacid analysis (Spero et al., 1965) and biophysical characterization of the molecule (Wagman et al., 1965). The rest of this section
will be mainly concerned with the type B toxin.
SEB has a molecular weight of around 35 000. It appears to be a more
stable substance than the botulinal toxins, for example, and has a remarkable
heat resistance. Thus, ordinary cooking cannot be relied upon to render
heavily contaminated foods harmless : the enterotoxins can withstand
boiling water for 30 minutes (US Department of the Army, 1965).
Toxicology
SEB is active both orally and parenterally. Its toxicity has been studied
when administered via the oral, intraperitoneal, and intravenous routes
and, as an aerosol, via the respiratory route. Emetic doses are generally
smaller by the intravenous. than by the oral route. In view of this it seems
likely that the primary site of action of SEB lies outside the intestinal lumen :
it is thus probably not strictly an enterotoxin. Nevertheless, there may be
some direct irritant action on the mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract.
It has been suggested that SEB evokes its characteristic vomiting response
in cats and monkeys by stimulating the vagal and sympathetic nerves (Clark
et al., 1962). The nature of the inciting stimulus in the gut remains obscure.
Fatal effects from aerosol inhalation in monkeys have been observed.
These have been shown to arise chiefly from pulmonary oedema (Lamanna,
1961).
No clinical studies of the effects of inhalation of SEB in man have been
published, although there is extensive literature on staphylococcal food
poisoning. In the latter, symptoms normally begin within ~-6 hours
(generally around 3 hours) after ingestion of the contaminated food, often
quite suddenly and violently. The onset time may well be shorter if SEB
enters the body via the respiratory route. The heralding sign is increased
salivation, which is followed by nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, watery
45

diarrhoea, and prostration. Pyrexia and hypotensive effects have been
observed .in some cases. Recovery generally occurs within 24 hours. Mortality from staphylococcal food poisoning ranges from 0-5% in different
outbreaks, and death occurs only when the dehydration is excessive, particularly in infants or the debilitated (US Department of the Army, 1965;
Morse, 1965).
,
The literature contains no estimates of the human incapacitating or
lethal doses of SEB, either by the oral or .the respiratory route, and it is
known that large differences in susceptibility exist among individuals.
Figures have been obtained with monkeys, cats and mice (Lamanna & Carr,
1967). Inhalation of 0.03 mg was sufficient to cause emesis in rhesus
monkeys (Lamanna, 1961).
Therapy

SEB is able to induce the production of neutralizing antibodies. An
anatoxin (toxoid) can be prepared by formaldehyde treatment that has
demonstrable immunizing capacity in the rhesus monkey. The use of antitoxin or toxoid in man has yet to be fully evaluated. Treatment is supportive.
Use as a chemical warfare agent

Because the staphylococcal enterotoxins are more stable, they would
presumably be rather easier to disseminate effectively in aerosol form than
the botulinal toxins, so it can probably be assumed that their military use
in this form would not present insuperable technical problems.
The prostrating, but generally short-lived, effects of staphylococcal food
poisoning suggest that the enterotoxins involved might make effective incapacitating agents, particularly as they have a rather rapid onset of action.
But in. view of their rather high toxicity, even though their incapacitating
dosage may be very low, their use in aerosol form or as water contaminants
would almost certainly. lead to an appreciable proportion of deaths, a
proportion that would be unpredictabl~ in the present state of knowledge.
2. Psychochemicals

The other main group of potential incapacitating agents comprises
certain highly potent psychotropic drugs. By affecting the central nervous
system in a variety of ways-the precise pharmacological mechanisms at
work are unclear-these drugs can so upset a subject's pattern of behaviour
as to suggest that exposed soldiers might become incapable of carrying out
their military functions.
The relationship between the behaviour of an isolated subject under
controlled conditions and the behaviour of groups of exposed soldiers in
combat situations is extremely obscure.. In the first place, drug-induced
46

behavioural changes in an individual may be strongly influenced by the
behaviour of other individuals in his group. With LSD, for example, it has
been demonstrated that drugged soldiers may behave in an apparently
normal manner within a unit containing undrugged soldiers. On this count,
it would seem that the effects of a· psychochemical on a group could be
accurately predicted only if its members could all receive doses that would
produce similar behavioural changes. This would require a foreknowledge
of the responses of each individual to dosages of the drug, together with
equipment for ensuring that each individual received the dosage suited to
him.
But there is a more fundamental uncertainty, one which is quite unresolvable: that resulting from the influence of individual motivations. With
a sufficiently powerful motivation a subject may accomplish quite complicated tasks even though he is obviously severely drugged and behaving
irrationally. It is thus possible that if individual reactions to drug-distorted
perceptions (there is no evidence to suggest that LSD is abnormal among
psychotropic drugs in this respect) happened to coincide with some useful
military activity and were sufficiently strongly motivated, the performance
of a fighting unit might increase rather than diminish under the influence
of a psychochemical. Instances of this are known in history. But the nature
of individual motivations and the physical responses to them are not
predictable: a combat unit may be as likely to excel itself as to behave in an
uncoordinated manner or to relapse into a stupor. Furthermore, motivations in war cannot be simulated in peacetime with any degree of confidence.
The likely military effects of psychochemicals can thus be guessed at but
never accurately predicted.
With some psychochemicals, behavioural disturbances may be complicated by physical incapacitation. These may include such effects as blurred
vision, fainting, and vomiting. The combined incapacitating effect may be
sufficiently great to suggest possible military applications.
The properties of two psychochemicals are reviewed below. Other
possible agents include certain cannabinols, amphetamines, and phenothiazines.
(i) LSD ( (

+)-N,N-diethyl~vsergamide)

LSD (sometimes known as LSD 25) can be prepared from lysergic acid,
which is obtained by fermentative processes from naturally occurring
substances. The crystalline free base is practically insoluble in water. The
tartrate, which has been produced for medical use, is readily soluble in water
and maintains its activities over long periods of time (Hofmann, 1968 ;
Hollister, 1968.) A 0.5% solution is tasteless.
LSD is reported to be sensitive to heat and light and to be readily
destroyed by oxidizing agents, including the chlorine in superchlorinated
water.

47

Toxicology
LSD is highly active when administered orally or parenterally, and
presumably also by inhalation.
The following three characteristic types of symptoms have been reported :

Somatic symptoms-dizziness, weakness, tremors, nausea, drowsiness, par• aesthesias, blurred vision
Perceptual sympto~s-altered shapes and colours, difficulty in, focusing on
obje<;ts, a. sharpened sense of hearing and, rarely, synaesthesias
Psychic symptoms-alterations,.in mood (happiness, sadness or irritability
at varying times), tension, distorted time sense, difficulty in: expressing
thoughts, .depersonalization, dreamlike feelings, and visual halhrcinations.
Physical effects are relatively few, dilated pupils, hyper-reflexia,increased
muscle tension, incoordination, and ataxia. being the most 'common.
Effects on pulse rate and blood pressure are variable, as are changes in
appetite and salivation. The clinical syndrome tends to follow a sequential
pattern with somatic symptoms first, perceptual and mood changes next,
and finally psychic changes, although there is considerable overlap between
these phases. Specific types of reaction, such as paranoid ideation, are
probably a matter of per~onal predisposition.
Many of the emotional and behavioural effects of LSD are due to an
excitatory effect of the drug, interpreted and elaborated by the subject.
The emotion experienced, and the ensuing behaviour, may vary widely
from person to person and from situation to situation. In a group comprising others in the same circumstances, the heightened arousal might well
be expressed in greater talkativeness and animation and be interpreted as
elation. In a strange setting, with unfamiliar people, where some nervousness may be. already present, anxiety is perhaps more likely (Smart et. al.,
1967).
With oral administration, the first signs of intoxication ~ay be expected
30-60 minutes after ingestion, the symptoms reaching a peak after•3-5 hours
(Hollister, 1968). An intoxication usually lasts about 12 hours (Council on
Mental Health and Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence,
1967), There is no i.ndication that children react generally .to LSD in a
different way from adults. The risk of severe reactions to LSD is increased
by the presence of cardiovascular diseases, pregnancy or epilepsy (Hollister·,
1968). Recent studies suggest that LSD may cause chromosomal damage
and the possibility of a teratogenic action ,has been discussed (Council on
Mental Health and Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence, 1967;
Smart et al., 1968).

48

An oral dose of 0.2-0.4 mg of LSD taken by a person who has not
tolerance will often induce fairly complete disorganization. Some
physical effects are experienced with doses as low as 0.03 mg, but as the
dose increases so do confusion and intellectual impairment (Hollister, 1968).
Tolerance to LSD develops rapidly, but is usually lost in 2-3 days. Some
chronic users have built up their LSD doses to 1 or 2 mg over a period of
3 days (Council on Mental Health and Committee on Alcoholism and Drug
Dependence, 1967; Hollister, 1968).
LSD can be expected to be equally active by practically every route of
introduction, including inhalation and injection. A degree of incapacitation
that could have military significance has been reported following inhalation
of dosages in the 10-100 mg-minjm3 range (FOA, 1967).
The lethal dose of LSD is controversial, and a variety of widely divergent
estimates have been made. Death might occur as a consequence of behavioural disorders, as well as of intoxication.
a~quired

Therapy
Contradictory reports on the biochemical effects of LSD allow no
conclusive statement on its mechanism of action, and it is still too early to
specify the chain of events leading from biochemical changes to the behavioural disturbances.
Depressants may be used to counter some of the effects of LSD intoxication. Effective antagonists include the phenothiazines, triflupromazine,
prochlorperazine, thiopropazate, and barbiturates. Promazine and promethazine are ineffective, while reserpine aggravates the LSD state (Hollister,
1968).

Use as a chemicallvarfare agent
In chemical warfare, LSD might be used either as a water contaminant
or to produce a short-term inhalation hazard, with a threat of delayed
incapacitating effects. Its use as a water contaminant is considered in some
detail in Annex 5.
To create an airborne hazard, LSD could be disseminated as an aerosol,
but because it is a solid and comparatively thermolabile substance, it would
be difficult to do this without elaborate aerosol generators. This fact,
together with its relatively high cost and the unpredictability of its effects
on groups, may make it unattractive as a chemical warfare agent, despite
its potency.
(ii) Agent BZ
BZ is a psychochemical that has been developed specifically as an·
incapacitating .agent for chemical warfare. It is an anticholinergic agent
closely related chemically and pharmacologically to such benzilates and

other glycolates as Ditran and aprofen. Its chemical structure is a military
secret, but it is believed to be a phenylglycolate ester of an aminoalcohol,
such as 3-quinuclidinol.
BZ is a white crystalline solid, whose physical and chemical properties
and thermal stability permit effective aerosols to be generated from pyrotechnic compositions.
Toxicology

BZ is apparently intended primarily for use in aerosol form to create a
respiratory hazard. Effective doses can also be absorbed through the skin
from suitable liquid formulations of the agent, although this must almost
certainly be a far less efficient process than inhalation of the aerosol.
The signs and symptoms of BZ poisoning are increased heart rate, dry
skin and mouth, mydriasis and blurred vision, ataxia, disorientation, and
confusion progressing to stupor. Small doses of BZ cause sleepiness and
decreased alertness. The casualty can be recognized by an elevation in
heart rate, dry skin and lips, and elevated skin temperature. Large inhaled
concentrations will produce a progressive intoxication in the untreated
casualty as follows (US Department of the Army, 1967):
1-4 hours:
tachycardia, dizziness, ataxia, vomiting, dry mouth, blurred
vision, confusion and sedation progressing to stupor
4-12 hours ; inability to respond effectively to environmental stimuli or to
move about
12-96 hours: increasing activity, random unpredictable behaviour; gradual
return to normal 2-4 days after exposure.
In the case of percutaneous intoxication, symptoms may take as long
as 36 hours to appear (US Department of the Army, 1968).
The ECt50 of BZ that produces a militarily significant degree of
incapacity in man has been reported to be 110 mg-minjm3 , and the ECt 30
to be 90 mg-min/m3 (Klose, 1968). No information is available on
estimates of lethal dosages or on experimental data with laboratory animals.
Therapy

Most of the physically incapacitating effects of BZ intoxication can be
explained adequately in terms of cholinergic blockade, and the central
effects resemble those of known anticholinergic psychomimetic drugs. Its
mechanism of action is thus very similar to that of atropine, although it is
far more potent than the latter in its effects on the central nervous system,
where it is capable of disturbing the higher integrative functions of memory,
50

problem solving, attention and comprehension (US Department of the
Army, 1968). Like atropine, it inhibits the sweating mechanisms, and if
used in hot, dry climates it may thus induce severe heat-stroke.
Just as anticholinergic drugs can counter some of the effects of anticholinesterase agents, anticholinesterase drugs can counter some of the
effects of anticholinergic agents. Physostigmine, for example, is an effective
antagonist of BZ poisoning. However, anticholinesterase drugs containing
quaternary ammonium groups, such as pilocarpine, neostigmine, and
prostigmine, are ineffective antagonists, as they are incapable of penetrating
the blood-brain barrier (US Department of the Army, 1968).
Anticholinesterase drugs are highly poisonous materials and their
correct use requires considerable skill. Atropine or other nerve gas antidotes should be held in readiness to cope with any overdosage.

Use as a chemical warfare agent
BZ apparently possesses the physical and chemical properties that are
essential for potential use in chemical warfare, and its cost is considerably
less than that of LSD. Effective field concentrations for military purposes
seem to be feasible, and weapons have been designed to disseminate it.
As an incapacitating agent, the principal drawbacks of BZ seem to be
unpredictability of its effects on troops in the field, and the severe or even
fatal injuries that may result from its use in hot, dry weather. There is no
information on the risk of directly lethal dosages being set up in the field,
but this is unlikely to be negligible.

C. HARASSING AGE:r\TS (SHORT-TERM INCAPACITANTS)
Introduction

Harassing agents may be defined as chemical agents that are capable,
when used in field concentrations, of rapidly causing a temporary disablement that lasts for little longer than the period of exposure. They may be
distinguished from such incapacitating agents as the so-called psychochemicals in that the effects of the latter have a delayed onset and persist
for a period greatly exceeding that of exposure. A distinction between these
two classes of chemical warfare agent may also be drawn on physiological
grounds : psychochernicals and allied incapacitating agents are centrally
acting substances, while harassing agents are sensory irritants. Their
harassing effects, which arise from the reflex responses of the body to
sensory irritation, include lachrymation, sternutation, vomiting, and pain.
51

Any sensory irritant can provoke all these responses, to a greater or lesser
extent, depending on the body tissues with which it comes into contact. The
conjunctivae of the eyes may be particularly sensitive towards some irritants: the predominant response would then be the secretion of tears, and
the irritant would be classed as a" lachcrymator ". Towards other irritants,
the inner surfaces of the nose or upper respiratory tract might be particularly
sensitive, and these agents would be classed as " sternutators ". Finally,
if dispersed as a gas or as particles of approximately 0.3-0.5 f1 diameter, an
irritant will penetrate to the deeper recesses of the respiratory tract.
If enough of a sensory irritant is inhaled, it may produce the same sort
of damage as that caused by a lethal lung irritant, such as phosgene.
Harassing agents were the. first type of chemical warfare agent to be
employed during the First World War, and by the end of the war some
13 000 tons of various types had been used, which was rather more than
the amount of mustard gas expended. By mid-1915, harassing agents were
being used mainly to force an enemy to wear gas masks, and so to reduce
his fighting efficiency : they were also used to force him out of cover and
so make him face capture or hostile fire, to deny him access to other terrain,
or to upset his firing efficiency. With an enemy carrying respirators, the
latter objectives were not often attained. None the less, at the time of the
Second World War, when respirators were greatly improved and had been
issued in large numbers, considerable stockpiles of harassing agents, mainly
CN (a lachrymator) and DM or adamsite (a sternutator), were accumulated
by most of the belligerants, amounting to some 12 000 tons for the German,
Japanese and United States armies alone.
Harassing effects can also be achieved with skin irritants, and some
pruritogens and algogens (such as phosgene oxime) have been described as
possible chemical warfare harassing agents. However, few of the skin
irritants available have a sufficiently powerful action to be attractive per se
for military purposes, and with the more potent ones, the risks of severe
lung damage on inhalation are likely to be unacceptably high for their use
solely as cutaneous harassing agents. Thus, skin irritation is unlikely to
be considered to render a substance suitable for use as a harassing agent
unless combined with other harassing effects, as in the case of some lachrymators and sternutators. Where the aim is prolonged exposure, however,
as in the case of organoarsenical vesicants, skin irritation could be an
undesirable property.
Military experience with harassing agents has encouraged the use of
such compounds in domestic police operations, such as the control of civil
disorders. Many of the military harassing agents are in fact quite unsuited
.to police use, either because the risk of fatalities is too high or because they
may easily cause exposed individuals to become totally incapacitated,
whereas the main reason for their use by the police is to get rioters or
potential law-breakers moving out of a particular area.
52

Ideally, a " police-type irritant " (or " riot-control agent ") should be
characterized by a combination of physical and toxicological properties
that will ensure that lethal exposures will be extremely rare and that the
harassing effects will be relatively benign. It is doubtful whether these
requirements are fulfilled by the agents at present being used in some
countries. If used without restraint in situations where airborne concentrations may persist, their effects will not remain relatively benign, and may
be lethal.
Some fifteen sensory irritants have been used in war as harassing chemical
warfare agents.
The three agents whose properties are summarized below have all been
extensively employed in war. The devices developed for their dispersal are
essentially the same ; they include hand grenades and rifle grenades ; projectiles for automatic launchers and rocket launchers, for both ground and
aircraft use ; mortar bombs ; gun and howitzer projectiles ; high-capacity
dusting apparatus, both por):able and for mounting in trucks or helicopters;
and aircraft bombs, cluster bombs, and bomblet dispensers.
(i) CN ( w-chloroacetophenone)

CN is a solid, generally disseminated as a particulate aerosol. It is
essentially a lachrymator. Exposure to a concentration exceeding about
0.5 mg/m3 , induces a copious flow of tears in less than a minute. At higher
concentrations, or with prolonged exposure, intense irritation is experienced
in the nose and upper respiratory tract, soon followed by an itching and
burning of moist areas of exposed skin, which may even lead to blistering.
Allergic reactions may also result (Jolly & Carpenter, 1968). On cessation
of exposure, recovery is swift, but at high dosages, such as might be
experienced within an enclosed space, serious lung damage may occur.
A number of deaths have been reported in the literature, due mainly to
pulmonary oedema.
The field concentration needed to produce harassing effects of military
significance is above about 10 mg/m3 • The human lethal inhalation dosage,
extrapolated from animal data, is estimated at around 11 000 mg-minjm3
(US Department of the Army, 1963), which is about the same as that for
the lethal agent cyanogen chloride.
(ii) CS ( o-chlorobenzalmalononitrile)
oC~

C(C'N),
53

CS was developed in the 1950s as a replacement for CN for police use.
It was the culmination of a search for a compound having a more potent
irritant action than CN but less likely to cause complete incapacity than
such agents as the arsenical sternutators. After being successfully tried
out by police forces, it has been used as a military harassing agent.
Its effects are qualitatively rather similar to those of CN, but are even
more rapid, .and are brought about at lower field concentrations. Militarily
significant harassment occurs at concentrations above about 1 mgjm3 , so
that on this basis CS is about 10 times as potent as CN. Thus a device
charged with CS is likely to be considerably more effective over a greater
area than a similar device charged with CN.
Three forms of CS have been developed for war use: the commercial
product itself, for dissemination by distillation ftom pyrotechnic compositions; CSl, a micronized powder formulation containing 5% of silica gel,
for dissemination by explosive burst or dusting apparatus ; and CS2, to be
used in the same way as CSl, and consisting of the latter microencapsulated
with silicone to improve its flow properties and weather resistance. Spread
on open terrain under normal weather conditions, CSl is effective for
about a fortnight ; CS2 is considerably more persistent (US Department of
the Army, 1969).
Experimental LCt50 values have been obtained in a variety of laboratory
animals. For CS aerosols made up of particles of 1.5 micron mass median
diameter, these range from 8 300 mg-min/m3 for guinea-pigs up to
43 000 mg-minjm3 for mice (Punte et al., 1962). The published estimates
of lethal doses for man vary from 25 000 mg-minjm3 up to 150 000 mgmin/m3.
In this connexion, it may be noted that estimates of lethal doses for man
are likely to be more unreliable for the harassing agents than for any other
CW agents. They can be made only by extrapolation from results obtained
with laboratory animals. Human volunteers can withstand only minute
dosages, and there are no indicators of the kind provided by cholinesterase
levels in nerve gas intoxication. Lethality data from industrial accidents or
suicide autopsies are unlikely to be obtainable, and the estimation of lethal
doses on the basis of deaths occurring when CS is used in police operations
or for military purposes can only be extremely imprecise.
No studies have yet been published on the long-term effects in man of
exposure to CS, despite the increasing use of this agent by police and
military forces throughout the world. Thus, while there appears to be no
evidence to suggest that CS is either carcinogenic or teratogenic, there is
also no evidence to show that it lacks these properties.
It must be accepted as a strong possibility that in individuals suffering
from asthmatic disorders or chronic bronchitis, these conditions will be
exacerbated by exposure to CS (Himsworth et al., 1969).

54

(iii) DM ( adamsite: 10-chloro-5,10-dihydrophenarsazine)
Cl

I

/AS~o~

0

~NH/

#

DM is a sternutator developed during the First World War. At low
aerosol dosages it causes severe irritation to the upper respiratory tract, the
peripheral sensory nerve endings, and the eyes ; it also irritates the skin but
to a smaller extent ; at higher dosages it attacks the deeper respiratory
passages. The irritation begins as a tickling sensation in the nose, followed
by sneezing, with a flow of viscous mucus, similar to that which accompanies a bad cold. The irritation then spreads down into the throat, and
coughing and choking set in until finally the air passages and the lungs are
also affected. Headache, especially in the forehead, increases in intensity
until it becomes almost unbearable, and there is a feeling of pressure in
the ears and pains in the jaws and teeth. These symptoms are accompanied
by an oppressive pain in the chest, shortness of breath, nausea (which soon
causes violent retching and vomiting), unsteady gait, a feeling of vertigo,
weakness in the legs, and trembling all over the body. Mental depression
may occur as the symptoms progress. The agent begins to take effect 2 or
3 minutes after exposure begins. Recovery is usually complete in 1-2 hours.
At very high dosages, the lungs may be damaged, and instances of death
have been reported (US Department of the Army, 1968).
The field concentration of DM needed to produce harassing effects of
military significance is about the same as that for CS. The human lethal
inhalation dosage is estimated to be around 15 000 mg-minjm3 (US Department of the Army, 1963).

D. ANTI-PLANT AGENTS
Chemical anti-plant agents have come into use in warfare since the
Second World War and their employment has increased rapidly over the
past few years. Something of the order of fifty thousand tons of anti-plant
agents have been sprayed in military operations over about 10 000 km2
of Viet-Nam (Tschirley, 1969; McCarthy, 1969). They are used to destroy
the enemy's food supply and to deny him concealment by foliage or vegetation.
No attempt will be made here to detail the modes of action of these
substances or to discuss their military uses. They are relevant to the present
report insofar as they may create public health problems and they are
considered below from this aspect.

55

Currently employed anti-plant agents

Chemical anti-plant agents being used in warfare today fall into two
groups. The first group contains the herbicides, plant growth regulators
and desiccants that are applied directly to plants or trees to kill or defoliate
them. The second group contains the soil sterilants that are used to contaminate soil and prevent or retard growth within it.
In the first group, there are at present four principal anti-plant agents:
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D). This has been employed in a
variety of salt and ester formulations, generally in admixture with other
anti-plant agents.
2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T). This has generally been
employed in combination with 2,4-D in ester formulations.
Dimethylarsinic acid (cacodylic acid). Generally employed as an aqueous
solution of the sodium salt.
4-Amino-3,5,6-trichloropicolinic acid (picloram). Generally employed in
a salt formulation in admixture with 2,4-D.

In the second group, there are two principal agents:
5-Bromo-3-sec-butyl-6-methyluracil (bromacil), employed either in dust
formulations, or in aqueous or fuel oil solutions.
3- (p-Chlorophenyl )-1 ,1-dimethylurea (monuron). Generally employed
in dust formulations of its trichloroacetate salt.

The following figures show the ranges of application rates generally used
with these agents for defoliation, crop-destruction or soil-sterilization.
The formulations given are those in current use in Viet-Nam (US Department of the Army, 1969).
Formulation

2,4-D/2,4,5-T (1:1) (agent orange)
Picloram/2,4-D (1:4) (agent white)
Cacodylic acid (agent blue)
Bromacil formulations
Monuron formulations

Application rate of the active
ingredient (kg/ha)

15-50
8-15
3- 8
15-30
20-30

Toxicological properties

As regards their acute toxicity, the anti-plant agents listed above are
only moderately toxic to warm-blooded animals (Tschirley, 1969). Some
experimental LD 50 values obtained with them are listed below:
56

' Agent
2,4-D
2,4,5-T
Picloram
Cacodylic acid

Acute oral LDoo in rats (mgfkg}
375
500
8200
1350

Monuron
Bromacil
Agent white
Agent blue
Agent purple a

3600
5200
3080
2600
566

a

Reference
Rowe & Hymas, 1954
House et al., 1967
Canada, Department of
Agriculture, 1968

House et al., 1967
Tschirley, 1969
House et al., 1967

Agent purple is a 2,4-D/2,4,5-T formulation almost identical with agent orange.

Very much less is known about the chronic toxicity or long-term effects
of anti-plant agents, for example, their teratogenicity or carcinogenicity.
In this connexion it must be borne in mind that the military employment of
anti-plant chemicals may lead to their intake, by humans, in water and food,
in dosages far higher than those experienced when the same chemicals are
used for agricultural and other purposes. While it would be untrue to say
that the possibility of chronic toxicity has been entirely ignored, it cannot
be said that it has received anything approaching adequate study. However,
the results of a preliminary laboratory study of the teratogenicity of one
of the anti-plant agents listed above have recently become known. It was
found that offspring of mice and rats given relatively large oral doses of
2,4,5-T showed a higher number of deformities than expected. While no
attempt was made to correlate these findings with the possible effects of
2,4,5-Tin man, the US Government has nevertheless been led to take action
to restrict the use of the agent (see also Report of the Secretary's Commission on Pesticides and their Relationship to Environmental Health, US
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, 1969).
REFERENCES
Albanus, L., Heilbronn, E., Sundwall, A. & Sorbo, B. (1966) Forsvarsmedicin, 2, 9-11
Amalric, P., Besson, P. & Farenc, M. (1965) Bull. Soc. Ophtal. Fr., 65, 101-106
American Industrial Hygiene Association (1968) Amer. ind. Hyg. Ass. J., 29, 308-311
(Hygienic Guide Series)
Aquilonius, S.-M., Fredriksson, T. & Sundwall, A. (1964) Toxicol. appl. Pharmacal.,
6, 269-279
Auerbach, C. (1949) Bioi. Rev·., 24, 355
Beebe, G. W. (1960) J. nat. Cane. Inst., 25, 1231-1252
Box, G. E. P. & Cullumbine, H. (1947) Brit. J. Pharmacal., 2, 38-55
Canada Department of Agriculture (1968) Guide to the chemicals used in crop protection,
5th ed. (Publication No. 1093)
Case, R. A. & Lea, A. J. (1955) Brit. J.prev. soc. Med., 9, 62-72
Caseman, E. P., Bergdoll, M. S. & Robinson, J. (1963) J. Bact., 85, 715-716

57

Clark, W. G., Vanderhooft, G. F. & Borison, H. L. (1962) Proc. Soc. exp. Bioi. & Med.,
111, 205-207
Council on Mental Health and Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence (1967)
J. Amer. med. Ass., 202, 47-50
Craig, F. N., Bales, P. D. & Frankel, H. M. (1959) J. Pharmacal., 127, 35-38
Davies, D. R., Holland, P. & Rumens, M. J. (1960) Brit. J. Pharmacal., 15, 271-278
Dickel, H., Fincke, A. & Gohr, H. (1952) Medizinische, 1 (20), 686-690
Dreisbach, R. H. (1969) Handbook of poisoning, 6th ed., Los Altos, Lange
Everett, E. D. & Overholt, E. L. (1968) J. Amer. med. Ass., 205, 243-245
FOA (1967) OM BC-stridsmedel, Stockholm, Fiirsvarets Forskningsanstalt (Orientar-OM),
No. 2, revised edition
Ghosh, R. & Newman, J. F. (1955) Chern. and Industr. (Lond.), No.5, p. 118
Gleason, M. N., Gosselin, R. E. & Hodge, H. C. (1957) Clinical toxicology of commercial
products, Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins
Grob, D. (1956) A.M.A. Arch. intern. Med., 98, 221-239
Grob, D. & Harvey, A. M. (1953) Amer. J. Med., 14, 52-63
Grob, D. & Harvey, J. C. (1958) J. clin. Invest., 37, 350-368
Hellreich, A., Goldman, R.H., Bottiglieri, N. G. & Weimer, J. T. (1967) The effects of
thermally-generated CS aerosols on human skin (US Government Research and development Reports No. AD 809-485)
Herrero, B. A., Ecklund, A. E., Streett, C. S., Ford, D. F. & King, J. K. (1967) Exp.
molec. Path., 6, 84-95
Heston, W. E. (1953a) J. nat. Cane. Inst., 14, 131-140
Heston, W. E. (1953b) Proc. Soc. exper. biol. Med., 82, 457-460
Hill, 0. W. & Chesney, J. (1966) Clin. Pediatr., 5, 554-559
Himsworth, H., Thompson, R. H. S. & Dornhorst, A. C. (1969) Report of the enquiry
into the medical and toxicological aspects of CS ( orthochlorobenzylidene malononitrite), Part I, London, H. M. Stationery Office
Hofmann, A. (1968) Psychotomimetic agents. In: Burger, A. ed., Drugs affecting the
central nervous system, vol. 2, London, Arnold
Hollister, L. E. (1968) Chemical psychoses; LSD and related drugs, Springfield, Thomas
House, W. B., Goodson, L. H., Gadberry, H. M. & Dockter, K. W. (1967) Assessment of ecological effects of extensive or repeated use of herbicides, US Clearinghouse
for Federal Scientific and Technical Information (Document No. AD 824314)
Ivanhoe, F. & Meyers, F. H. (1964) Dis. Chest. 46, 211-218
Jolly, H. W. jr & Carpenter, C. L. jr (1968) J. Amer. med. Ass., 203, 808
Julea, D. & Popa, I. (1966) Rev. Sanit. Militara, No. 5, pp. 845-850
Klose, K. (1968) Militiirtechnik, 11, 493-496
Kondritzer, A. A., Mayer, W. H. & Zvirblis, P. (1959) A.M.A. Arch. industr. Hlth,
20, 50-52
Lamanna, C. (1959) Science, 130, 763-772
Lamanna, C. (1961) Bact. Rev., 25, 323-330
Lamanna, C. & Carr, C. J. (1967) Clin. Pharmacal., 8, 286-332
Manufacturing Chemists' Association Inc. (1961) Hydrocyanic acid, Washington (Chemical
Safety Data Sheet, SD-67)
Markkula, H. (1967) B-Krigforing: Medel-mal-skydd. In: Jacksen, s., Markkula, H.
& Tammelin, L.-E., B-skydd i Svensk, Stockholm, Fiirsvarets Forskningsanstalt
(Sakerhetspolitik FOA 1 Rapport A 1404-30)
McCarthy, R. D. (1969) The ultimate folly, New York, Knopf

58

Morse, S. I. (1965) Staphylococci and other micrococci. In: Dubos, R. J. & Hirsch,
J. G. eds., Bacterial and mycotic infections of man, 4th ed., Philadelphia, Lippincott,
pp. 412-439
Namba, T. & Hiraki, K. (1958) J. amer. med. Ass., 166, 1834-1839
Paulet, G. (1960) L'intoxication cyanhydrique et son traitement, Paris, Masson
Punte, C. L., Owens, E. J. & Gutentag, P. J. (1963) Arch. environm. Hlth, 6, 366-374
Punte, C. L., Weimer, J. T., Ballard, T. A. & >Vilding, J. L. (1962) Toxicol. appl.
Pharmacal., 4, 656-662
Rowe, V. K. & Hymas T. A. (1954) Amer. J. vet. Res., 15, 622-629
Salzgeber, B. (1968) C. R. Acad. Sci., 267D, 90-92
Sax, N. I. (1963) Dangerous properties of industrial materials, 2nd ed., New York, Reinhold
Schantz, E. J., Roessler, W. G., Wagman, J., Spero, L., Dunnery, D. A. & Bergdoll,
M. S. (1965) Biochem., 4, 1011-1016
Smart, R. G., Storm, T., Baker, E. F. W. & Solursh, L. (1967) Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) in the treatment of alcoholism, Toronto, University of Toronto Press
Sollmann, T. (1957) A manual of pharmacology, 8th ed., Philadelphia, Saunders
Spero, L., Stefanye, D., Brecher, P. 1., Jacoby, H. M., Dalidowicz, J. E. & Schantz,.
E. J. (1965) Biochem., 4, 1024-1030
Szirmai, E. A. (1966) Arztl. Forsch., 20, 47-48
Tammelin, L.-E. (1957) Acta chem. scand., 11, 1340-1349
Tammelin, L.-E. (1958) Svensk kern. T., 70, 157-181
Thienes, C. H. & Haley, T. J. (1964) Clinical roxicology, Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger
Tobias, J. M. et al. (1949) Amer. J. Physiol., 158, 173-183
Tschirley, F. H. (1969) Science, 163, 779-786
Tyler, H. R. (1963) Arch. Path., 76, 55-59
US Department of the Army (1963) Military chemistry and chemical agents (Technica]
Manual TM 3-215)
US Department of the Army (1965) Military chemistry and chemical agents, Change
No. 1 (Technical Manual TM 3-215jC.1)
·
US Department of the Army (1967) Military chemistry and chemical agents, Change No.2
(Technical Manual TM 3-215/C.2)
US Department of the Army (1968) Treatment of chemical agent casualties (Technical
Manual TM 8-285)
US Department of the Army (1969) Employment of riot control agents, flame, smoke,
antiplant agents, and personnel detectors in counterguerrilla operations (Training
Circular TC 3-16)
Vocci, F. J., Ballard, T. A., Yevich, P. & Punte, C. L. (1963) Toxicol. appl. Pharmacal.,
5, 677-684
von Oettingen, W. F. (1958) Poisoning. A guide to clinical diagnosis and treatment,
2nd ed., Philadelphia, Saunliers
Wada, S., Miyanishi, M., Nishimoto, Y., Kambe, S. & Miller, R. W. (1968) Lancet,
1, 1161-1163
Wagman, J., Edwards, R. C. & Schantz, E. J. (1965) Biochem., 4, 1017-1023
Wirth, W., Hecht, G. & Gloxhuber, Chr. (1967) Toxikologie Fibel, Stuttgart, Thieme
Yamada, A. (1963) Acta path. jap., 13, 131

59

ANNEX 2

BIOLOGICAL AGENTS
INTRODUCTION
In contrast to chemical weapons, there has fortunately been no authenticated use of biological agents in modern warfare. A large number of
potential agents for use against human targets exists, and choices can be
made to suit particular purposes and circumstances. Table 4 contains a
list of the candidates that are considered most likely to be used because
of their microbiological and epidemiological characteristics. Some of these
agents are described later.
Many other agents not discussed here are worth mentioning briefly.
They include the viruses of lymphocytic choriomeningitis; mumps, the
parainfluenza group, poliomyelitis, rabies, measles and rubella; the bacteria that cause diphtheria, leptospirosis, listeriosis, meningococcal meningitis, pneumococcal pneumonia, streptococcal infections and tuberculosis;
the agents of several mycotic infections-blastomycosis, cryptococcosis,
histoplasmosis, nocardiosis ; and protozoa that cause diseases such as
amoebic dysentery and malaria. Almost any of these agents could be used
in defined circumstances, e.g., in combination with other agents or weapons,
but they are considered of lesser importance than many of those selected
for discussion below because of the many other variables that would have
to be taken into account to obtain any sort of predictable quantitative
effect. Such variables would include levels of pre-existing immunity,
difficulties in dissemination because of the lability of the micro-organism,
and lack of knowledge of human infective doses.
The following descriptions of individual diseases and micro-organisms.
involve many in which man-to-man transmission is relatively unimportant.
Several diseases considered here, however, notably influenza and pneumonic plague, are highly infectious to man; while others, such as those
caused by arboviruses (yellow fever, Venezuelan equine encephalitis,
tick-borne and Japanese encephalitis) and rickettsial diseases (epidemic
typhus, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Q fever) usually require an intermediate vector (mosquitos, ticks, lice, fleas, etc.). Quantitative estimates
have been attempted in Annex 3 for primary cases resulting from a biolo60

gical weapons attack ; secondary effects from spread are described in the
annex.
Military consideration would appear to be given generally to the possible
use of agents characterized by little tendency to spread. Such a tendency
could very well change and virulent new strains could emerge from human
or animal populations exposed to them in war or in field tests. An additional hazard is the creation of new or increased animal reservoirs.
Another point worthy of emphasis is that the military use of many of
the micro-organisms discussed would involve an atypical route of entry,
namely, the lungs through aerosol exposure.
Human infection by the respiratory tract has been achieved experimentally for some of these diseases (yellow fever, Rocky Mountain spotted
fever, tularaemia) and is known to occur naturally in exceptional instances
for others (e.g., Venezuelan equine encephalitis, Rift Valley fever, tickborne encephalitis, typhus fever). It is not known whether atypical infection
of man through the respiratory tract, which can by-pass such normal
protective mechanisms as local inflammatory processes, would increase
the case fatality rate 1 of diseases ordinarily of low lethality, such as Venezuelan equine encephalitis. By analogy with other infections of man where
respiratory entry is exceptional (pneumonic plague, respiratory anthrax),
this should be regarded as a strong possibility.
While large-scale laboratory production of all the agents discussed
here is feasible in most advanced microbiological laboratories, the drying,
processing and delivery of most of them as military weapons require
sophisticated technology. Some of them, however, such as smallpox virus,
can be produced and used as weapons with relatively simple techniques.

A. VIRAL Thi"FECTIONS

1. Arthropod-borne (arbmiruses)

There are some 200 viruses belonging to the arbovirus group, transmitted
to vertebrate hosts by blood-sucking arthropods such as mosquitos and
ticks. About 75 of these viruses have been shown to produce diseases in
man ; most of these are relatively mild and non-fatal but they also include
such lethal diseases as yellow fever and tick-borne and Japanese encephalitis.
The descriptions that follow are designed to illustrate the variety of effects
associated with the possible employment of different members of this group
as biological agents for warfare.
1
Case fatality rates, as used in this report, represent the percentage of deaths in
clinically ill persons.

61

(i) Yellow fever
Between the 17th and 19th centuries yellow fever was one of the great
scourges of large parts of the world, wiping out populations and paralysing
commerce. Its main habitats were the Americas and Africa and it was
periodically introduced into Europe. Since the early part ofthe 20th century
the disease has not appeared in North America and Europe, although
it has continued to affect large parts of Central and South America and
Africa. In recent years epidemics have occurred in Nigeria (1951-1954),
Trinidad (1954), Central America (1948-1957), French Equatorial Africa
(now Congo (Brazzaville)), the Belgian Congo (now the Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (1958), Sudan and Ethiopia (1959-1962), and
Senegal (1965).
Yellow fever is caused by a virus (Group B of the arboviruses) that is
transmitted by a variety of mosquitos, mainly Aedes aegypti in urban areas
and Aedes and Haemagogus species in forest areas. The disease has now
been successfully controlled in most urban communities, especially in the
Americas, where the man-mosquito-man cycle is operative. It is now
mainly confined to forest and contiguous areas that favour the cycle of
monkey-mosquito-man characteristic of jungle yellow fever. Sporadically
the virus is reintroduced into the man-mosquito-man cycle in towns and
villages and urban outbreaks of yellow fever result.
Apparently the disease has never occurred spontaneously in Asia, a
fact that has long puzzled epidemiologists because all the requisites seem
to be present: mosquito vectors, susceptible humans and monkeys, and
considerable traffic between infected areas in Africa and south-east Asia.
There is understandably a great fear of the introduction of yellow fever
on the part of the health authorities in Asian countries, and considerable
precautions are taken with respect to the disinsection of incoming aircraft
and the vaccination of travellers who have recently visited countries where
the disease is endemic.
The virus can easily be propagated in large amounts in eggs or tissue
culture and freeze dried.
The disease in man has an incubation period of 3-6 days, and the
blood is infective for mosquitos shortly before .and during the first 3 days
of illness. Infected mosquitos require a period of 9-12 days before they
are capable of transmitting the virus to man, so that the initial cases are
usually sporadic and often missed. There is then a gradual build-up of
infected mosquitos in an area, after which explosive outbreaks occur in man.
This has resulted in very extensive epidemics during the past 300 years,
yellow fever being perhaps the most feared disease during recent history
in the Western Hemisphere as far north as the USA.
In man the disease has a sudden onset, with fever, headache, backache,
prostration, nausea and vomiting. As it progresses, epistaxis, bloody
62

vomitus and jaundice occur. Case fatality rates up to 30-40% are not
uncommon in unvaccinated individuals living in urban or rural areas when
the disease is newly introduced. New outbreaks require emergency epidemic
measures, including mass vaccination with living attentuated vaccines,
vigorous and sustained anti-mosquito control measures and special diagnostic
services. Monkey reservoirs in forest areas cannot be eradicated and thus
the disease continues indefinitely. The severe nature of the disease taxes
to the limit any medical services available. It is evident therefore that, if
yellow fever was introduced into the Asian continent and took foothold
there, the results could well be catastrophic.
Use as a biological agent
Aerosol transmission of yellow fever has been achieved in the laboratory.
The possible effects of the virus in this form are given in Table 10, Annex 3.
The disease might be introduced by mosquito vectors and/or by infected
monkeys. Successful introduction would depend upon the establishment
of foci of infection in a few or many areas within a short space of time.
The presence of the disease in even one locality would require extraordinary
protective measures to be taken, including mass vaccination of the population and extensive and persistent mosquito control. Health resources in
south-east Asia are extremely limited and would undoubtedly be unable
to deal with multiple foci of infection and the resulting epidemics, which
would entail anything from tens of thousands to millions of cases and
deaths. There would also be severe disruption of community life and
services and a constant threat of spread of the disease to uninfected areas.
Long-term effects would include the permanent establishment of uneradicable enzootic reservoirs in monkeys and perhaps other wildlife. Periodic
prophylactic vaccination of large population groups and mosquito control
for an indefinite duration would be needed.
(ii) Tick-borne encephalitis
This disease occurs as two sub-types-Far Eastern and central European-in the USSR, parts of central and western Europe and in the Scandinavian countries. It is usually transmitted by the bites of infected ticks.
With the central European sub-type, milk-borne transmission (milk of
goats and probably also of sheep and cattle) frequently occurs, over
600 persons having been infected in a milk-borne epidemic in Czechoslovakia in 1951. The natural cycle of infection involves reservoirs in wild
rodents, hedgehogs and birds, with transmission by Ixodes ticks among
themselves and to man and domestic animals. The virus can be grown in
tissue culture and is quite stable in milk or milk products, relatively high
temperatures being required for its inactivation. It is one of the most
63

dangerous to work with in the laboratory because of its high infectivity
by contact or by air-borne droplets.
The· Far Eastern sub-type of the disease in man has an incubation
period of 1-2 weeks. The initial phase of the disease may be mild, with
headache, respiratory symptoms, and general malaise. Severe headache,
fever, nausea and vomiting then occur, followed in severe cases by stiffness
of the neck, somnolence, delirium or coma, convulsions, partial or complete
paralysis and, usually, death within a week. In non-fatal cases, severe
illness may last only a week but convalescence may take months, and
residual paralysis of the arms and shoulder girdle is common. The case
fatality rate is 20-30%, and often higher in children. The Central European
sub-type of the disease is more benign, with a case fatality rate of 0-5% in
different outbreaks. Treatment is symptomatic and hospitalization is
required for all seriously ill individuals. Available vaccines give only
moderate protection.
Use as a biological agent

People are almost universally susceptible. The ease with which the
Far Eastern virus can be grown in the laboratory and its high infectivity
and lethality by the aerosol route would make it likely that a case fatality
rate of 25% would be achieved. The introduction of a Central European
sub-type of the virus into milk after pasteurization could affect large
numbers of people, especially children, but this would be difficult to accomplish in modern milk sterilization or pasteurization plants. These do
not exist, however, in many parts of the world and where raw or insufficiently heated milk is consumed, widespread infection could be produced.
Secondary effects would include the establishment of enzootic reservoirs in
suitable wild animal hosts ; the ticks that transmit the disease are common
in many areas.
(iii) Japanese encephalitis
This disease is epidemic in Japan, Taiwan, mainland China, Eastern
Siberia, Korea and some of the western Pacific islands, and endemic
in the Malay peninsula, Thailand and India. Periodic epidemics can be
severe, such as the one in Korea in 1958 in which there were 5 700 reported
cases and a 20% case fatality rate. The ratio of clinically apparent to
inapparent infections is 1 : 500 to 1000. Epizootics occur in horses and
pigs, causing abortion and foetal abnormalities in the latter. The natural
cycle of infection involves culicine mosquitos, which feed on lower animals
(pigs, birds, horses and perhaps bats) and then transmit the disease to
susceptible hosts, including man. The virus can easily be reproduced in
tissue culture and has apparently been used in aerosol form in laboratory
experiments (Wedum, 1961).
64

Symptoms in man include severe headache, very high fever, stiff neck
and encephalitic signs such as stupor, confusion and delirium;' or somnolence progressing to coma and death in about '10 days. Non-fatal cases
may have a prolonged convalescence, with weakness, incoordinati0n, and
partial paralysis. Serious sequelae, commonly seen in children' under
10 and in adults over 60 years of age, include mental impairment and
behavioural changes. The case fatality rate is 20-30%. Good hospital
care is required to keep mortality as lmY as possible. Available vaccines
confer some, but not a high degree of, protection.

Use as a biological agent
Populations' outside endemic areas are universally susceptible. Since
aerosol infeCtion of animals has apparently been achieved in the laboratory,
it is reasonable to assume that Japanese encephalitis can be disseniinat~d
by aerosols with effects similar to those described above for Far Eastern
tick-borne encephalitis. Secondary effects would include infection of susceptible domestic animals and wildlife and the establishment of enzootic
reservmrs.
(iv) Dengue
This is an acute febrile illness caused by several different types of the
dengue virus, transmitted from man to man by mosquitos of tl;le Aedes
group. In the last 50 years some very large epidemics, involving from
Yz to 2 million people, have occurred in Australia, Greece, Japan and the
USA. The disease is endemic in many countries of the western Pacific,
south-east Asia, Africa and the Caribbean area.
Dengue virus can be readily grown in the laboratory and vec;tor mosqltl,i,.
tos can be infected with it.
The disease generally has an incubation period of 5-7 days. The onset
is sudden, with fever, severe headache and backache, accompanied by
equally severe pains in the muscles and joints.· It is usually self~limiting,
but highly incapacitating during the acute phase.
In some instances the disease may develop into a more serious haemorrhagic form which has a case fatality rate of about 5%. This form is
considered by some to be a result of sensitization caused by previous
infections with strains of dengue virus.

Use as a biological agent
A widespread incapacitating effect could be expected fro~ aerosol use
'of dengue virus on susceptible populations. The seiious haemorrhagic
form might occur in certain population groups, resulting' in a large number
of dea.ths. Theoretically, the introduction of dengue into a carefully
65

chosen area by infected vector mosquitos is possible but would be difficult
and unpredictable in its effects. If infection were introduced in such a way,
small local epidemics would first result and would gradually build up to an
explosive epidemic as succeeding groups of humans and mosquitos became
infected.
(v) Venezuelan equine encephalitis (VEE)
Epidemics of this disease have occurred periodically in man and equines
in Venezuela (where it was first reported in 1938), Colombia and Panama,
and in equines in Ecuador and Argentina. Multiplication of the virus is
easily produced in tissue culture. Numerous laboratory infections have
been reported in man through contact or by air-borne droplets. In nature,
transmission occurs through mosquitos that have fed on infected lower
animals (rodents, birds, equines). In the laboratory, aerosolized virus
has infected monkeys at relatively low concentrations-! 000 or more
guinea-pig ID 50 values (50% guinea-pig infective doses) (Kuehne et al.,
1962).
The disease is sudden in onset and characterized by severe headache,
chills and fevet, nausea and vomiting, muscle and bone pains, and encephalitis (5% of cases in man). The case fatality rate may reach 0.5%, but
usually recovery is rapid after one week, although residual weakness may
occur for up to three weeks. Treatment is symptomatic. Protection by
vaccination is still experimental.
Use as a biological agent
Since the virus can be produced easily in large amounts in the laboratory
and air-borne infection has readily occurred, concentrated aerosols could
be expected to incapacitate at least half the population exposed and to kill
some of them (Table 10, Annex 3; also see Introduction). Most populations
are completely susceptible. Severe incapacitation would last for about a
week, with a return to fairly normal activity within three weeks after
exposure. Hospital facilities would be required for the cases resulting in
encephalitis. The equine population would be similarly affected, and
enzootic reservoirs might be established for future epidemics.
(vi) Chikungunya
Large epidemics of this disease, affecting up to 40% of the population,
have occurred since the early 1950's in Tanzania and in Thailand. It has
also been reported in Southern Rhodesia, Congo (Brazzaville), the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cambodia and India. A wide variety of
mosquito species in various areas have been shown to harbour the virus,
and non-human primates and perhaps other lower animals are thought
66

to act as natural reservoirs and amplifiers. The virus grows well in tissue
culture.
The incubation period is 3-12 days and the onset very sudden. Severe
joint pains in the limbs and spine incapacitate within hours. The patient
doubles up and remains immobile with a high fever, which lasts up to 6
days. After a remission of a few days another less intense bout of fever
occurs, accompanied by an irritating rash on the trunk and limbs. The
second stage lasts for about a week, although joint pains can recur for up
to 4 months and may cripple the patient. There is no treatment except
analgesics, and preventive vaccines are not available.

Use as a biological agent
Susceptibility is almost universal in temperate climates. Aerosol delivery
and entry of large amounts of virus through the lungs might be expected
to produce severe incapacitating effects within one or two days and some
deaths. Where suitable lower animal hosts and mosquitos are present,
enzootic reservoirs might be established.
(vii) O'nyong-nyong
The virus of this disease is closely related to the chikungunya virus.
A very large epidemic started in 1959 in C ganda and spread into neighbouring countries, where by 1962 over t'vo million people were infected,
the attack rate being over 70%. The vectors are anopheline mosquitos.
The symptoms resemble those of chikungunya with sudden onset,
chills, severe pains in the back and joints, headache, rash, and neck lymphadenitis. Recovery without sequelae occurs in about a week.

Use as a biological agent
Similar to chikungunya.
(viii) Rift Valley fever
At present restricted to parts of central, eastern and southern Africa,
this is an important disease of sheep, cows and goats, causing abortion and
high mortality in young lambs and calves. A great epidemic and epizootic
occurred in South Africa in 1950-51, during which an estimated 20 000
people became infected and 100 000 sheep and cattle died. The virus
can easily be cultivated in chicken embryos and tissue culture. Infection in
man by inhalation or through handling infected animals is very common.
The virus is stable in aerosols (Miller et al., 1963). Transmission in nature
occurs through infected mosquitos, with wild animals, possibly rodents,
acting as reservoirs.
67

\.

In man the disease is severe but usually not fatal. After an incubation
period of 4-6 days there is sudden fever, malaise, nausea and vomiting,
severe headache, muscular pains and dizziness. After 2-3 days of fever,
there is a 1-2 day period of remission, followed by another 2-3 days of fever.
Recovery is uneventful, but malaise and weakness may persist. There are
rare ocular complications.

Use as a biological agent
Similar to chikungunya.
2. Other viral infections
(i) lrifluenza

Pandemics of influenza occur when a shift in the composition of the
influenza virus results in a new strain with an unusual infecting capacity.
Advances in virology have enabled research workers to examine closely
the strains isolated since 1933, including the current (1968-69) Hong Kong
strain. Although the occurrence of certain changes in the protein coat of the
virus has been established, the factors responsible for infectivity and
rapidity and universality of spread remain unidentified. Thus it is not
known why the 1918 pandemic (which resulted in the death of about
20 million people) or previous and subsequent pandemics occurred.
Equally, it is still impossible to anticipate the change that will give rise to
the next natural pandemic.
A large number of influenza virus strains closely related to the human
strains that have caused pandemics are circulating freely in the lower
animal kingdom throughout the world, affecting wild and domestic birds,
swine and equines. Experimental recombinations of these strains among
themselves and with human strains are easily achieved in the laboratory.
It is now being postulated by some workers that such recombinations
occur periodically in nature, or individual virus strains may mutate and
then emerge as a new human pandemic strain. It is therefore possible
that with the present rapid progress in fundamental research on the influenza
virus, sooner or later a recombinant influenza virus may be produced in the
laboratory that would be capable of causing a pandemic, against which a
suitable vaccine could be prepared to protect the population and military
forces of the attacker. Human trials of such strains may be feasible under
strictly isolated conditions.
Influenza is an airborne infection, and aerosol dissemination, as well
as aerosol immunization, is easily possible. The virus grows easily in large
quantities in embryonated chicken eggs, and can be dried or frozen for
storage.
68

Influenza in man is characterized in its benign form by fever, general
malaise, respiratory distress, headache, myalgia and prostration lasting
several days. One or two weeks of convalescence are required for full
activity to be resumed. The disease most affects the very old, pre-existing
cardiovascular or respiratory difficulties increasing the mortality. The
large number of deaths occurring in young males (but not young females)
during the 1918 pandemic was completely at variance with the previously
known character of influenza as an epidemic disease ; they may have been
associated with host rather than viral factors. Influenza complications such
as pneumonia can now to some extent be controlled by antibiotics.
Present vaccines are effective (about 50-70%) against current strains of
virus, but against a new strain it would take 3-4 months in technically
advanced countries to prepare sufficient vaccine to protect populations.

Use as a biological agent
With a hypothetical new strain, very limited aerosol dissemination in a
few crowded urban areas in temperate climates might spark off an epidemic
or pandemic. If the factor or factors responsible for pandemic spread were
to be identified and incorporated into the new strain, the rapidity of dissemination throughout the world would be great, probably within a matter
of a few months with modern means of travel, and in much less time within
the confines of a country attacked. Large-scale aerosol dispersion over a
populated area could incapacitate the population of ~he area within the
1-3 days incubation period and kill a number of people (Table 10, Annex 3).
The mortality from current strains is low (about 0-2%). A high mortality,
perhaps causing millions of deaths, could occur if the 1918 experience
was repeated.
(ii) Smallpox
One of the oldest known communicable diseases of man, smallpox
remains endemic in parts of South America, Africa and Asia. While
extensive and systematic vaccination is carried out in many parts of the
world, some degree of susceptibility to the disease is still found in many
areas, e.g. 40-70% in Europe, the Eastern Mediterranean area and the USA.
The causative agent is the variola virus. This can be easily produced
in large quantities in the laboratory in embryonated eggs and tissue cultures.
The virus can be freeze-dried and its virulence thus preserved for months
or years.
The sites of entry of the virus are the upper respiratory tract and the
skin, where the virus multiplies during the usual incubation period of
9-12 days. A short period of viraemia then follows, characterized by fever,
malaise, headache and backache, abdominal pain and prostration. The
69

virus is localized in the skin, mucous membranes and other tissues where
a rash shortly appears.
The eruption is usually most profuse on the face. The initial macular
rash quickly becomes papular, then vesicular, and finally pustular. The
pustules in turn form crusts which are shed, leaving indelible scars of
varying size and severity. The sites of focal eruptions are extremely rich
in infective particles, and early erosion of the mucous membranes ensures
heavy contamination by the saliva and other mucous secretions. The
majority of deaths occur in the pustular stage and the case fatality rate of
classical smallpox in unvaccinated people is of the order of 30% ; the milder
form of the disease (alastrim) causes mortality in less than 1%.
Unvaccinated human beings are extremely susceptible to variola virus.
Fortunately, smallpox vaccine is one of the most effective known in medical
practice, and may still give some protection if applied shortly after exposure.
Chemoprophylaxis with methisazone has been successful.
Use as a biological agent

Because of the effectiveness of the vaccine and the relative ease with
which it can be produced and administered, it is unlikely that smallpox
virus would be used as an agent for a large-scale biological attack against
countries systematically practising periodic vaccination.
The variola virus, however, can easily be employed for acts of sabotage.
Such acts, at selected points within a country, could have serious socioeconomic effects unless efficiently dealt with by the public service. Although
variola major may cause severe illness and a high mortality in the unvaccinated, the disease spreads comparatively slowly, infecting only one third of
the susceptibles who are in very close contact with the patient. Once
detected, outbreaks can be rapidly contained through isolation of patients
and vaccination of close contacts. However, if public health measures are
not efficiently applied, the disease may become widely disseminated and
extensive programmes of vaccination may be required.

B. RICKETTSIAL INFECTIONS
1. Typhus, epidemic

The great epidemics of typhus that have plagued man since ancient
times ceased shortly after the Second World War. Pockets of the disease
still exist in a number of countries, and in conditions such as occurred in
the First and Second World Wars major epidemics might again arise.
The disease is caused by Rickettsia prowazeki and is transmitted from man
to man by lice. The rickettsial organism can readily be grown in chicken
70

embryos, and aerosol infection of man and experimental animals can be
produced.
The disease in man is usually very severe and prolonged. The usual
incubation period of 10-14 days may be shortened by heavy exposure. The
first symptoms are sudden-chills, aches and pains, headache and weakness.
Fever remains until recovery or death. During the first week a rash appears.
The symptoms grow progressively more severe, with the critical period
in the second or third week. Stupor and coma may be interrupted by
attacks of delirium. The case fatality rate increases with age, being about
3% in infants, 30% in the 40-50 age group and 50% in old people. Vaccines
and antibiotics are effective in prophylaxis and treatment respectively.
Use as a biological agent
Most populations are completely susceptible to typhus, and therefore
a surprise large-scale attack with an aerosol form of this agent could cause
death, illness and social disruption over a wide area, especially where there
is a shortage of antibiotics (Table 10, Annex 3).
2. Rocky Mountain spotted fever
This disease has been reported only in the Western Hemisphere-in
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Mexico, Panama and almost all of the continental USA, particularly the Rocky Mountain area. It is transmitted by
ixodid ticks from a variety of infected lower animal species (field mice,
rabbits, hares, squirrels, chipmunks, dogs). The causative organism,
Rickettsia rickettsi, can be cultured in large quantities in embryonated
eggs. Aerosol experiments in the laboratory have shown that monkeys die
after inhaling only 4-6 times the dose used to infect eggs (Saslaw & Carlisle,
1966). The disease in monkeys very closely resembles that observed in man.
The incubation period in man is 3-12 days (5-7 days in aerosol-infected
monkeys). The onset is abrupt, with severe headache, chills, fever, muscle
and joint pains, and prostration, and the symptoms continue for 2-3 weeks.
A rash begins to appear on about the fourth day and gradually involves
most of the body. In fatal cases death occurs during the second week from
toxaemia, shock, blood vessel alterations and renal failure. Before antibiotic therapy the case fatality rate in some areas reached 80% for unvaccinated adults, and about 37% in children; the overall case fatality rate was
20%, but in adults over 40 years of age about 50% died. Antibiotic therapy
and intensive medical care in the hospital can reduce mortality to 3-7%.
Vaccinal prophylaxis gives a varying degree of protection.
Use as a biological agent
Susceptibility is world-wide. Aerosol infection has been proved possible,
and the extent of illness and death it would cause would depend on the
71

quantities of micro-organisms that could be disseminated, the availability
of hospital care and antibiotic therapy, and vaccinal prophylaxis prior to
attack. The estimated effects are given in Table 10, Annex 3. Enzootic
reservoirs of infection would probably be established in rural areas of the
world where suitable animal reservoirs and ticks exist.
·'
3. Q fever

Q fever, caused by Coxiella bu.rneti, occurs in most parts of the
world. It is a zooposis, .the organism residing naturally in an extensive
range of lower animal hosts, including all kinds of domesticated livestock
and poultry, dogs, rodents, baboons and wild birds. Natural infection
occurs also in some 40 different species of ixodid .and argasid ticks, mites
and parasitic flies, which play a principal role in maintaining the disease
in nature. Transmission to m;m occurs primarily by the airborne route via
inhaled droplets or dust that also may contaminaty the skin and conjunctivae, or by ingestion through insufficiently heated milk or milk products.
Low temperature vat pasteurization is insufficient to kill the organism.
The Q fever organism is relatively resistant to environmental influences
such as temperature changes and humidity, and is extremely infectious to
man. Experimental studies in4icate that even one micro-organism is sufficient to infect man (Tigerttet al., 1961). It is easy to produce very large
amounts in embryonated chicken eggs (20 billion organisms per ml).
The incubation period in man is 18-21 days, but falls to 10 days when
large doses of the organism are inhaled. The onset is sudden, with chills,
fever, headache, loss of appetite, ~muscle and chest pains, and general
malaise. In severe cases these progress to stiffness of the neck and back,
confusion and disorientation, and pneumonia. The fatality rate is usually
less than 1%, but somewhat higher among Africans. In patients who recover
complications are not common but weakness and fatigue may last for
months, accompanied by weight loss. In persons over 40, fever may continue
for a month or more. Antibiotics are effective in treatment only if given
early, and can abort infection if administered late in the incubation period.
Prophylactic vaccines are not very successful and often cause undesirable
reactions.
·
Use as a biological agent
It is clear from this description that a Q fever aerosol could produce an
incapacitating effect on a large segment of the population of an area attacked
and cause some deaths (see Table 10, Annex 3). The infective agent could
persist in the environment for many months and infect th,e animal life,
creating permanent reservoirs of infection. Food products could be contaminated and, since ingestion of the organism is known to cause disease,
would have to be cooked thoroughly before consumption.
72

C. BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
1. Plague
Plague, the Black Death of history, rarely causes serious epidemics at
present. It is endemic, however, in many countries of Africa, the Americas.
and Asia, with many species of rodents acting as reservoirs. The usual
form of the disease, bubonic plague, is spread to man by fleas from infected
rodents. The much more virulent pneumonic form is transmitted directly
from man to man by droplet infection.

Pasteurella pestis, the causative organism of plague, can easily be prepared in large quantities and, if properly stored, retains its virulence for
many years. It is resistant to environmental conditions, at least one hour
of exposure to sunlight being needed to kill the organism when contained
in small droplets. While desiccation is harmful toP. pestis, when protected
by mucous or other substances it can resist drying for many days. It can
survive a wide variety of temperatures ( -2°C to + 45°C) and would
therefore be relatively unaffected by hot or cold weather. Freeze-drying
procedures can preserve the organism for long periods.
Pneumonic plague can be produced by means of aerosols containing P.
pestis, the size of the droplet nuclei that penetrate the alveoli and cause
pneumonic plague being between 1fl and 5f1 in diameter. Animal experiments
have shown that particles of 111 diameter containing single cells can cause
typical pneumonic plague. In experimental pulmonary plague in monkeys
about 100 organisms administered intratracheally were sufficient to cause
fatal pneumonic infection (Meyer, 1965). Inhalation of about 20 000 cells
induced a chronic pneumonic process in some Macaca mulatta monkeys
from which virulent bacilli were recoverable for up to 40 days (Ransom &
Krueger, 1954). Organisms in droplets that would not reach the alveoli but
be deposited in the nose or conjuntiva could also cause bacteraemia.
The incubation period in man is 2-6 days in bubonic plague and 3-4 days
in pneumonic plague. Bubonic plague is characterized by high fever,
shock, mental confusion, acute and painful swelling of the lymph nodes
draining the site of entry of the micro-organism, prostration, delirium and
coma. Pneumonic plague results in primary pneumonia. Untreated
bubonic plague has a case fatality rate of 25-50%, while pneumonic plague
is usually fatal. Antibiotics are effective if used early in the disease.
Preventive vaccination is moderately effective against bubonic but not
against pneumonic plague. With killed vaccine, protection is relatively
short-lived (3-12 months) and periodic revaccination is necessary. Massive
infection can overcome vaccine-conferred immunity.
Use as a biological agent
Plague is a suitable potential weapon of biological warfare. The microorganism is resistant to environmental conditions and highly infective,
73

most populations are completely susceptible, and the disease is severe with
a high fatality rate.
A large quantity of organisms could easily be grown and kept ready
for use. The delivery of droplet nuclei of the desired size is not a major
problem; the addition of various stabilizers would increase the viability
of the plague bacilli in the nuclei.
If an initial infection with pneumonic plague were to involve about 50%
of a population, it is likely that, unless precautions had been taken, up
to about 90% of the rest of the population would be infected in 20-30 days,
with a case fatality rate of 60-70%.
Infection would also be transmitted to urban and field rodents. Those
animals that did not die very soon of pulmonary plague would develop
bubonic plague, and either die or survive and transmit the infection to the
next generation of rodents. Thus a natural focus of plague would be created
which would constitute a permanent danger for the geographical areas
affected.
If for some reason primary infection was not too widespread and fewer
people contracted pneumonic plague, an epidemic starting with a limited
number of primary human cases might produce secondary cases and gradually gather speed in a population migrating and living under war conditions. The effect on rodents would also be slower but would gradually
increase, resulting in widespread bubonic plague among rodents and consequently among men.
2. Anthrax

This is a world-wide acute septicaemic disease of domesticated animals
caused by Bacillus anthracis, which produces highly resistant spores that
persist in the environment for decades. Man becomes infected by contact
with animals or contaminated animal products, or by inhalation of infected
dust from hides, wool and similar substances. The organism and its spores
can be produced in almost unlimited amounts in the laboratory, and much
experimental work has been done on the aerosol dispersion of the spores.
Virulent antibiotic-resistant strains have been produced in the laboratory
through selection procedures. Lethal aerosol infections of monkeys have
been readily produced, and the spores can persist in the lungs of surviving
animals for many months. Over a period of 5 days, 1 000-5 000 spores were
sufficient to kill 25% of monkeys exposed to a naturally contaminated
environment (Brachman et al., 1966). In cynomolgus monkeys exposed to
aerosols of anthrax the ID 50 was slightly more than 4 000 spores (Glassman,
1966).
Natural infection in man occurs principally through the skin, although
inhalation and ingestion of the organism can cause small-scale epidemics.
Infection through the skin starts as a malignant pustule and progresses to

74

septicaemia and death in about 20% of diagnosed cases if not treated
with antibiotics. Inhalation anthrax has a fulminating course, with death
following toxaemia and septicaemia in over 80% of cases. Ingestion
anthrax appears to be equally fatal. Incubation periods range from a few
days to 1-2 weeks, depending on the magnitude of the exposure. Antibiotics
are moderately effective if the disease is recognized sufficiently early and
treatment is prolonged. Recently developed vaccines seem to confer
good protection on man in the small exposures encountered in industrial
establishments, but their value is not known where heavy exposures are
concerned.
Use as a biological agent

Heavy concentrations of anthrax spores in aerosols are feasible. This
could result in up to 70-80% fatalities in untreated cases (Table 10, Annex 3)
and in domesticated livestock, with less infection and a lower fatality
rate in areas where aerosol dilution occurs. Antibiotic treatment would
have to be prolonged for weeks, since it has been shown that monkeys
exposed to aerosols die if antibiotic therapy is discontinued after 10 days
(Henderson et al., 1956). Vaccines available at present might not protect
efficiently against heavy aerosol exposure. Food contamination would
require prolonged sterilization to make all animal and food products safe.
The environment would be contaminated indefinitely, and restocking with
livestock and all aspects of food production would be rendered difficult for
a long period. Air carriage of spores could be expected to contaminate
localities far distant from the area of immediate attack.
3. Tularaemia
In the natural cycle of infection, tularaemia is primarily a disease of a
wide variety of wild mammals and birds and is transmitted by arthropods
(different species of ticks, fleas and flies). The disease is world-wide in
distribution. Man and domesticated animals enter accidentally into this
cycle through contact with infected animals (rabbits, hares, etc.) or arthropods, ingestion of contaminated food or \Vater, or inhalation of contaminated dust. Tularaemia is easily transmitted by aerosol and the infective
dose for man is as low as 25 bacterial cells (McCrumb, 1961). The organism,
Pasteurella tularensis, which can be produced on a large scale, easily resists
environmental influences ; it can be stored for years in dried form, and
virulent and antibiotic-resistant strains have been produced in the laboratory.
The incubation period varies from 1 to 10 days, averaging 3 days. Its
length of time depends upon the portal of entry, the skin and conjunctiva
giving the longest and the respiratory and alimentary systems the shortest
incubation periods. Infection through the skin or conjuntiva is characterized by swelling of the lymph glands draining the area, malaise and fever.
75

Ingestion tularaemia resembles typhoid fever, and infection from inhalation
causes pneumonia in about half the cases (Overholt et al., 1961). Pleuropulmonary tularaemia has a high case fatality rate (40-60%) if untreated
(McCrumb, 1961). Septicaemia, which results from the disease, causes
necrotic lesions in many organs. , Streptomycin is highly effective if administered early (one hour) after exposure to the disease, and works well even
if started within 48 hours. However, it would not be effective against
streptomycin-resistant strains of the micro-organism. Other antibiotics
(tetracyclines, chloramphenicol) are also effective, but antibiotic therapy
must be prolonged (about 10 days) to prevent relapses. Aerosol immunization has been successfully achieved, but the immunity can be broken by as
little as 1 000 human infective doses (approximately 25 000 organisms)
(McCrumb, 1961).

Use as a biological agent
The high infectivity of the tularaemia organism by various routes makes
it a particularly suitable agent for biological warfare. Aerosol delivery
(Heden, 1967; Jacksen et al., 1968) could be expected to cause infection
in at least half the people exposed, and probably much more in those
receiving high doses of the organism. A case fatality rate of approximately
25% could be expected if a virulent strain were used (Table H), Annex 3
and Annex 5). If an antibiotic-sensitive strain of relatively low virulence
was used, with the aim of incapacitating, as opposed to killing, deaths
would be considerably reduced but still be appreciable in number. Illness
in survivors would last several weeks and relapses could occur over a period
of months. Water and food would be contaminated and have to be subjected to heat treatment before consumption. Enzootic reservoirs of
infection would be established in wild mammals and serve as future sources
of disease. Preventive vaccination would probably only marginally modify
the effects of exposure to concentrated aerosols.
4. Brucellosis
Brucellosis is an acute or chronic infection in man and domesticated
animals and is caused by any one of three species of Brucella, namely,
abortus, suis and melitensis. The disease is world-wide in distribution
and is characterized by abortion in infected animals. Br. abortus particularly affects cattle, Br. suis swine and Br. melitensis sheep and goats,
although all these species as well as man are susceptible to all three types.
In man the melitensis and suis types produce the severest disease. Infection
of man easily occurs by contact (small abrasions in the skin or muc<?sa),
ingestion or inhalation. The organism can be produced in unlimited
amounts by continuous culture in fermenters, and in its dried form retains
its virulence for years. In its moist form it can. persist in the environment
76

for weeks. About 1 000 organisms are considered necessary to produce
infection in man. Some 50% of individuals subjected to heavy natural
exposure show frank disease, although up to 80% can be infected to the
extent that sensitivity and the possibility of subsequent chronic infection
result.
The ID50 of Br. melitensis in cynomolgus monkeys inoculated intradermally was less than 100 bacterial cells (Elberg & Faunce, 1962), and the
ID 50 of Br. suis administered as an aerosol to guinea-pigs was 36 cells
(Elberg & Henderson, 1948).
The incubation period varies between 1 and 4 weeks, with shorter
periods after severe exposure. The symptoms, highly variable and taking
many forms, consist principally of chills and undulating fever, headache,
loss of appetite, mental depression, extreme exhaustion, aching joints and
sweating. They last for 2-4 weeks but may continue for months. Spontaneous recovery may occur but periodic relapses with a return of symptoms
often occur. The cycle may continue for months or years and result in
invalidism accompanied hy liver and bone complications. Even prolonged
treatment with antibiotics is only moderately effective, and vaccines protect
to only a limited extent. Superinfection can occur after severe exposure
because previous natural protection or protection by vaccination confers
only a moderate level of immunity. All age groups are susceptible, although
children resist light exposures more easily than adults. The overall mortality
rate is less than 2%.

Use as a biological agent
The high infectivity of Brucella, its relative resistance to environmental
influences and its proved infectivity in aerosol form suggest that 50% of
people could readily be infected by aerosol attack (Table 10, Annex 3).
Incapacitation of the affected population would be achieved for at least
2-3 weeks despite antibiotic therapy, and could be prolonged for several
weeks with relapses continuing for months or years. With a high enough
exposure abortion could be expected to occur epidemically in cattle, sheep,
goats and swine despite vaccination, which protects only against moderate
exposure. High exposure would also overcome the limited protection
obtainable in man with the vaccines available at present. The usual low
case fatality rate might well be markedly increased through exposure to
aerosols.

5. Typhoid fever
This disease is endemic in most parts of the world where lmv levels of
sanitation exist. It occurs only rarely in economically developed countries.
The classical epidemics were often the result of contaminated community
water supplies.

77

The typhoid organism, Salmonella typhi, grows very rapidly on simple
media and can be prepared in large quantities with little equipment and
skill. It is a hardy micro-organism that withstands normal environmental
conditions well. Normal water treatment procedures, including chlorination, are sufficient to kill the small number of bacteria that may be present.
Infection usually occurs through the gastro~intestinal tract, but aerosol
infection can also be produced with far fewer bacilli than are necessary for
the alimentary route of infection. The ingestion of 107 or 105 organisms is
sufficient to produce infection in 50% or 25% respectively of immunized
people (Hornick & Woodward, 1966), while 109 organisms can infect nearly
all exposed persons and overcome protection ·by vaccination against the
disease (see Annex 5). Vaccination therefore produces only a relative
immunity that may last for a few years. Of the people infected, 3-5%
remain carriers and sources of infection for long periods, even for life.
The incubation period in man is 1-2 weeks. The onset of the disease is
gradual, with malaise, headache and fever. It then progresses to prostration,
abdominal distress, rash and a high fever often resulting in delirium.
Without treatment the case fatality rate is about 10%. The antibiotic
chloramphenicol is effective in treatment, reducing the case fatality rate to
less than I%, but hospitalization and isolation are required for 2-3 weeks
to prevent the spread of the disease and to ensure adequate treatment of
complications.
Use as a biological agent
Aerosol dispersion of the organism and infection of community water
supplies are both feasible. Quantitative estimates of .effects following
intentional contamination of a community water supply are given in
Annex 5. Aerosol dispersion would contaminate exposed food and water
supplies, which would consequently require disinfection and sterilization.
Chemoprophylaxis and immunoprophylaxis would not be effective against
very large doses of the organisms. The usual bacteriological detection
procedures would not give any forewarning of deliberate introduction of
infection into a water supply over a period of hours or even days.
D. FUNGAL INFECTIONS
1. Coccidioidomycosis

This is a dust-borne disease caused by the fungus Coccidioides immitis.
The organism occurs in the soil, mainly in arid and semi-arid countries.
It is diphasic, with a hyphal or so-called "saprophytic" form and an arthrosporic form that is resistant to environmental influences. The fungus is
endemic in south-western USA, northern Mexico and Venezuela. It has
also been reported in the USSR.
78

Infection usually takes place through the respiratory tract by breathing
in dust containing infective arthrospores. Subclinical infections are common.
The organism can easily be grown in laboratories and yields a large
number of resistant arthrospores that could be widely disseminated by
aerosol.
Mter an incubation period of 10-20 days, there is an influenza-like
illness with fever, chills, cough, pleural pain, headache and backache.
About one-fifth of all clinically recognized cases develop erythema nodosum.
The primary infection may resolve without any detectable sequelae,
or it may result in lung lesions (fibrosis and calcification) detectable by
X-rays. In rare cases extrapulmonary dissemination occurs, with abscesses
and involvement of bones and the central nervous system. Before the use
of amphotericin B the disseminated form had a mortality rate of 50%. The
drug is relatively toxic, and relapses may occur when treatment stops.
There is no satisfactory preventive immunization procedure applicable on
a large scale (Smith et al., 1961).
Use as a biological agent

Concentrated aerosols, which are technically feasible, could no doubt
cause widespread infection, but it would be extremely difficult to make any
predictions as to their effect. Used as a biological weapon, the organism
might succeed in causing general disruption because of the lack of effective
methods of prophylaxis or chemotherapy.

E. THE PREDICTABILITY OF EPIDEMICS
1. Epidemiological considerations

The extent to which contagious diseases spread through, and their
manifestations in, human populations are highly variable. In a developed
country a few hundred cases of smallpox or plague may produce anxiety
or even mild panic, but the outbreak can usually be controlled by routine
public health measures. Such an epidemic is not a threat to the survival
of the community. In developing countries diseases may be much more
widespread and have a regular endemic character ; but massive spread to
the whole community is limited by a high degree of naturally acquired
immunity and public health measures will help. On the other hand, diseases
like influenza or measles may attack a large proportion of a community,
especially if it has acquired little immunity from previous exposure or by
immunization. That some diseases (e.g., influenza, measles, plague, and
smallpox) are in fact capable of affecting a large part of a population in a
highly disastrous fashion is a matter of historical fact.
79

A major question is whether epidemics are rare accidents or whether
they could be started deliberately. It is possible that, by a deliberate selection
of mutants or through recombinants, highly virulent and spreading strains
could be obtained. However, it is very difficult to say whether strains
with such properties have in fact been selected or produced without prior
testing in man. A clearer picture of some of the quantitative elements
involved can be built up by certain theoretical mathematical considerations.
2. Mathematical considerations

In order to gain insight into the quantitative factors determining the
occurrence and size of epidemics, it is useful to construct a simple mathematical model. It is assumed that there is a large population at risk, of
size N, and that all members of this population have the same chance of
meeting each other .1
.
The chance that a susceptible person will m~et an infectious person is
assumed to be proportional to the number S of susceptibles and the number I
of infectious persons. It is also assumed that the chance of infection resulting
from such a meeting is constant. The rate of occurrence of new infections
will then be AS! where A is assumed to be a constant. The value of A
will depend both on the nature of the community and on the epidemiological features of the disease.
Isolation, physical disability, and death will remove infected persons
from contact with the general population at a rate proportional to I, so
that the total rate of removal will be BI, where B is assumed to be a constant
which will again be dependent on the nature of the community and on the
epidemiological features of the disease.
A disease will spread if the rate of appearance of new infections in the
ambulatory population is greater than the rate of removal of infected persons from circulation, that is, if the ratio of AS!; to BI is greater than unity
and, hence, if AS/B is greater than unity.
If S = N before an epidemic gets under way, which is likely to be the
case, the condition that an epidemic shall start is that AN/B should be
greater than unity. It is usual to put AN/B =G. It will be clear that if C
is less than unity, this means that infected persoJs are being removed faster
than new infections are occurring, so that no epidemic can occur. But if C
is greater than unity, the disease will spread py contact faster than itis
being removed. Moreover, at least to begin with, the rateincreases as time
goes by. For example, in a population where N = 1000 and I= 1 initially,
the rate of new infections is ANI= lOOOA to start with. But if at a later
stage there are, say, 10 circulating cases and.5 removais, then S = 985 and
1 This will not be strictly true, hut as long . as the chance of two people meeting
does not depend on whether one is infectious and the other is susceptible to infection,
the average value of the chance of meeting is all that needs to be specified.

80

I= 10. The rate of new infections is now 9850A, nearly ten times as great.
Eventually a point is reached when the spread begins to slow down again.
In relation to biological warfare, the main interest is in the total number
of cases occurring during the whole course of the epidemic. This can be
shown to depend primarily on the value of C, and Table 3 shows what might
be expected to happen on the basis of this simple model when C has various
values.
TABLE 3. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE PERCENTAGE
OF THE POPULATION INFECTED AND C

c
1.00
1.03
1.05
1.12
1.19
1.28
1.39
1.53
1.72
2.01
2.56
3.15

I

Percentage of population
eventually infected

0
5
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
95

In interpreting this Table, it is important to remember that C = ANjB,
and that both A and B are dependent on social factors as well as on the
properties of the infecting organism. Thus, any organized response to an
epidemic that reduces A and increases B by social measures will reduce C.
The chance that tllis will happen during an epidemic will depend very much
on the nature of the community.
It should be clear that if organisms that possess a high infectivity were
to be selected for biological warfare purposes, the value of A would be
high, other things being equal. Also, the value of B would remain close
to zero for the major part of the incubation period, since there would be·
nothing to trigger off a social response until clearly diagnosed cases appeared
in appreciable numbers. The value of C could therefore remain very high:
over a period of time, which would be of the same order as the incubation:
period. Consequently, in a biological warfare attack, in which the fraction,
of the population primarily infected might be expected to be very much
greater than it is likely to be in any natural epidemic, it seems very unlikely
that any constructive response to the first appearance of signs of the disease
could have any effect on the size of the epidemic.
3. Danger of epidemic warfare as a tactical weapon
The use of epidemic warfare on a strategic scale might therefore seem
to be impracticable, since-if it works at all-it might affect a very high
81

proportion of the population attacked and, even if the attacking country
were protected in some way (e.g., by immunization), changes to more virulent forms of the organism employed might overcome the protection or the
massive doses involved might overwhelm ordinary levels of immunity. This
might lead to its alternative use as a tactical, as opposed to a strategic,
biological weapon. It could be employed tactically to achieve the simultaneous infection of key groups of people, including military units. If they were
TABLE 4. SOME POTENTIAL BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS AGAINST MAN
Protection by
vaccination
against
currently
known strains

Effectiveness
of serotherapy
or
chemotherapy

A. Viruses
Adenoviruses (some strains)
Arthropod-borne viruses (eastern, western and Venezuelan equine encephalitis; Japanese B; Russian
spring-summer group; dengue; yellow fever; etc.)
B virus and related herpesviruses
Enteroviruses (some members)
Influenza
Marburg virus (vervet monkey disease)
Sandfly (phlebotomus) fever
Smallpox

B. Rickettsiae and bedsoniae
Psittacosis (ornithosis)
Q fever
Rickettsialpox
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Scrub typhus (tsutsugamushi fever)
Typhus (epidemic)

+to-

±

+
?

±

+

±

+
+
+
+
+
+

C. Bacteria
Anthrax
Brucellosis
Cholera
Glanders
Melioidosis
Plague
Shigellosis
Tularaemia
Typhoid fever

±
±
±

±
±

+
?
?

±
?

±
±

D. Fungi
Coccidioidomycosis

+
+
+
+
?

E. Protozoa
Schistosomiasis (bilharziasis)
Toxoplasmosis

a

+ = suitable

or good

± = moderately effective

=

?

82

±
±

unsuitable or poor
marginal or of questionable value, either because of the nature of the agent or because
of insufficient knowledge.

simultaneously attacked by sufficiently Yirulent plague or influenza organisms, the military consequences might easily prove great. If the level of virulence were chosen so that the coefficient C was well below the critical value
of unity, then the incipient population epidemic could be easily contained
by the usual public health measures. No special action would be required
by the enemy, and he would have to take only the minimal steps to protect
his own troops or civilian population.
Biological warfare of this kind as a tactical weapon could easily be
widely adopted. The danger would be that, though apparently relatively
safe in the sense that only limited outbreaks of disease would be planned,
there would always be a possibility of a virulent and spreading mutant
appearing unexpectedly and producing an uncontrollable epidemic on a
large scale. Mutants might also be deliberately sought in the laboratory,
with the ever-present danger of their escape from the laboratory itself.
REFERENCES
Brachman, P. S., Kaufmann, A. F. & Daldorf, F. G. (1966) Bact. Rev., 30, 646-657
Elberg, S. S. & Faunce, W. K. jr (1962) Bull. Wld Hlth Org., 26, 421-436
Elberg, S. S. & Henderson, D. W. (1948) J. inf. Dis., 82, 302-306
Glassman, H. N. (1966) Bact. Rev., 30,657-659
Heden, C.-G. (1967) Ann. ReP. Microbial., 21, 639-676
Henderson, D. W., Peacock, S. & Belton, F. C. (1956) J. Hyg., 54, 28-36
Hornick, R. B. & Woodward, T. E. (1966) Trans. Amer. clin. climat. Ass., 78, 70-76
Jacksen, S., Markkula, H. & Tammelin, L.-E. (1968) Strategisk. Bull., 4, 3
Kuehne, R. W., Sawyer, W. D. & Gochenour, W. S., jr (1962) Amer. J. Hyg., 75,347-350
McCrumb, F. R., jr (1961) Bact. Rev., 25, 262-267
Meyer, K. F. (1965) Pasteurella and Francisella. In: Dubos, R. J. & Hirsch, J. G. eds,
Bacterial and mycotic infections of man, 4th ed., Philadelphia, LippijlCOtt, pp. 659-697
Miller, W. S., Demchak, P., Rosenberger, C. R., Dominik, J. W. & Bradshaw, J. L.
(1963) Amer. J. Hyg., 77, 114-121
Overholt, E. L., Tigertt, W. D., Kadull, P. J., Ward, M. K., Charkes, N. D., Rene,
R. M., Salzman, T. E. & Stephens, M. (1961) Amer. J. Med., 30, 785-806
Ransom, J.P. & Krueger, A. P. (1954) Amer. J. trap. Med. Hyg., 3, 1040-1054
Saslaw, S. & Carlisle, H. N. (1966) Bact. Rer., 30, 636-644
Smith, C. E., Pappagianis, D., Levine, H. B. & Saito, M. (1961) Bact. Rev., 25, 310-321
Tigertt, W. D., Benenson, A. S. & Gochenour, W. S., jr (1961) Bact. Rev., 25, 285-293
Wedum, A. G. (1961) Bact. Rev., 25, 210-216

83

ANNEX 3

BASES OF QUANTITATIVE ESTIMATES
A. HYPOTHESES CONCERNING DELIVERY, DISPERSION
AND CONCENTRATION OF AGENTS
1. Delivery
Chemical and biological weapons have been developed that are suitable
for delivery by most of the systems now used for conventional weapons.
Thus means already exist for spreading chemical and biological agents by
missile warheads, spray-tanks mounted on manned or unmanned aircraft,
and aircraft bombs, bomblet clusters, or bomblet dispensers. Chemical
agents can also be spread by tube or rocket artillery, mortars, land-mines,
grenades, and portable dispensers.
In this report, attention is focused on the effects that could be produced
by weapons dropped from one or a very few aircraft and generating an
aerosol cloud extending across the direction of the wind along a continuous
line 2 km in length.
2. Specification of dosage
The chance that a particular dose will be received by a person when the
air around him contains a toxic substance will be proportional to its concentration in the air and to the time for which he is exposed to this concentration. This function of concentration and time is referred to as the Ct.
Generally, when the concentration changes with time, the total dosage
received will be proportional to the area under the concentration/time curve
and the Ct will be equal to this area. Where the concentration is constant,
the Ct is the product of the concentration and the time of exposure.
If concentration is expressed in mg/m3 and time is in minutes, then the
Ct is expressed in mg-min/m3 • For example, if a man goes into a chamber
in which the air contains 10 mg/m3 of an agent and stays there for 10 minutes
the Ct will be 100 mg-min/m3 • Next suppose that the agent is absorbed
solely through the lungs. If the man is at rest he is likely to have breathed
in 100 litres ( = 0.1 m 3) in the 10 minutes and he will have taken in 1 mg
of the agent, but he is not likely to have absorbed all of it. However, if
the concentration had been twice as great or the exposure time twice as
long and everything else had been equal, the man would have received
84

twice the dose. Thus, the Ct is a measure of the intensity of exposure, and
not of the dose that actually penetrates into the body, and the concept
applies as much to pathogens as to chemical agents.
3. Specification of toxicity and infectivity

The LD 50 (lethal dose 50) of a drug or a microbe is the dose that will kill
50% of the subjects receiving it. It may also be defined as the dose that has a
50% probability of killing any particular individual. Correspondingly, and
more generally, one can specify an ED 50 (effective dose 50) as the dose that
has a 50% probability of producing any precisely definable effect, for
infective agents the term ID.50 (infective dose 50) is used for the dose that has
a 50% probability of producing a specified response to infection, considered
in this report as symptoms or signs of disease or death.
Correspondingly, the ED 5 indicates the dose likely to cause an effect in
5% of those exposed and the ED 95 is the dose likely to affect 95% of exposed
persons.
Neither the LD 50 nor the ED 50 gives sufficient information in itself to
form a guide to the relation between dose and effect. The additional
information needed is provided by the " slope of the pro bit line ", which
can always be calculated from the data required for the accurate determination of an ED 50 (Finney, 1952, 1968). This figure is dimensionless, so
that its meaning is independent of the units of dosage.
The steepness of the slope indicates the factor by which the ED 50 must
bemultiplied to give any other specified probability of producing a response
to the drug. The steeper the slope, the more rapidly the probability of an
effect increases with increase in dose (see Table 5).
TABLE 5.

INFLUENCE OF PROBIT SLOPE ON AGENT INFECTIVENESS

Slope of the
probit line

Ratio of ED 95
to ED 5

0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.5
2.0
5.0
10.0
20.0

3.80x10 5
3.04x 10 5
5.01 x10"
1.30x10'
4.53 X 103
1.95x10 3
1.56x10 2
4.41 X 10
4.55
2.13
1.46

I
II
'i

I
I

I

Ratio of ED 95
to EDso"

1.95X10 3
5.51 X10 2
2.24X 10 2
1.14X10 2
6.73X10
4.41X10
1.25X10
6.65
2.13
1.46
1.21

1

I

I
I

a This is equal to the ratio of the EDso to the ED,.
N.B. At low probit slopes, the probability of effect changes so slowly with dose, even in
the neighbourhood of the LDso, that it is not possible to specify the LD 50 with any great exactitude,
even when large numbers of animals are used for its estimation.
1

85

This table shows that for slopes appreciably less than unity, there is a
very slow change of effectiveness of dosage, whereas for slopes of 20
or over the change of effectiveness is so abrupt that doses just detectably
smaller than the ED 50 are almost harmless and doses just detectably greater
are almost 100% effective. This has a bearing on the comparison of toxicities. Quite small differences between the ED 50 values of two compounds
will imply real differences in toxicity if both slopes are large, but very large
differences in the ED 50 may have no practical significance if both slopes are
small.
In the intermediate range of values of the slope, it is essential to consider
the slope of the probi~ line and the ED 50 together when making comparisons
between effectiveness of toxic substances, especially if interest centres on
probabilities of effectiveness well removed from 50%.
Consider, for example, two potential incapacitating agents, A and B.
Agent A has an ED 50 of 1 mg-min/m3 and a probit slope of 1. Agent B
has an ED 50 of 5 mg-min/m3 and a probit slope of 5.
On the basis of ED 50 values, agent A appears to be 5 times as effective
as B. But reference to Table 5 will show that the ED 95 of A is 44 mgmin/m3, whilst the ED 95 of B is less than 11 mg-min/m3 • Thus, when a
high probability of effect is required, B can be 4 times as effective as A.
When the probit slopes are lower (e.g., 0.5 and 1.0) larger ratios of ED50
values can be misleading.
Whereas very highly toxic chemical agents can have probit slopes (5-10)
many biological agents have slopes less than or near to unity. This means
that a biological agent cloud may travel a considerable distance downwind
before its dosage drops from an LCt50 to an LCt5 , but that exceedingly
high concentrations are needed to give an ED 95 • Table 6 shows experimental
probit slope values for different pathogen/host-species combinations.

TABLE 6. PROBIT SLOPES FOR INFECTION BY SELECTED PATHOGENS

Agent

I

Host

Probit slope

Coxiella burnet/

guinea-pigs

aerosol

1.7 (Tigertt et al., 1961)

VEE a virus

guinea-pigs

aerosol

0.8 (Ehrlich & Miller, 1968)

Bacillus anthrac/s (spores)

cynomolgus
monkeys

aerosol

0.7 (Glassman, 1966)

Pasteurella (Franc/sella)
tularensis

mice

aerosol

0.9

(Lincoln & DeArmon,
1959)

Salmonella typhi

man

oral

0.7

(Hornick & Woodward, 1966)

a Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis.

86

I

Route of
administration

4. Local meteorological factors

Winds are nearly always inconstant in force and direction and every
irregularity in or on the surface ofthe ground contributes to the irregularities
of their motion. Much work has been done on the effect of these irregularities of motion on the distribution of pollution through the atmosphere,
and it is important to determine what can be learnt about the probable
distribution of chemical and biological agents from this work.
Pasquill (1962) has devised categories of atmospheric turbulence that are
generally accepted for making rough estimates of the spread of atmospheric
pollutants. Of these, category A is the most turbulent, and it is rare in the
only regions for which frequency of occurrence is well known. Category F
is the most stable atmospheric state for which realistic predictions can be
made. Examination of long-term meteorological records for the United
Kingdom have shown that, in most places, states E, F and those of greater
stability than F (which can be considered for present purposes as similar)
are likely to occur at around midnight on about half the nights throughout
the year. The longer the nights, the longer will be the period in which these
degrees of stability will be observed; in mid-winter, it may extend from
6 p.m. to 6 a.m. (from 18.00 to 06.00 hours). For the purposes of this
discussion, maintenance of this degree of stability for two hours would
suffice; in the United Kingdom this degree of stability occurs during
different times at all periods of the year.
Most of the information about the dissemination of pollutants in the
atmosphere under different conditions of atmospheric stability has been
derived from studies in open country. It is usual to predict the likely
atmospheric stability from the wind speed, the state of the sky, and the
time of the day. Over cities, the atmospheric turbulence may be expected
to be augmented by the extra surface roughness and by heating from industrial, commercial and domestic processes. Pasquill (1962) provided estimates
the vertical spread of a pollutant released at ground level after it had
travelled different distances over open country. A study carried out by the
US National Air Pollution Control Administration in the city of St Louis
(McElroy & Pooler, 1968) provides the only published evidence of the
extent of the additional vertical spread that is to be expected over urban
areas.
It is unfortunate that the best data are available for one of the world's
most labile climates, namely that of the United Kingdom. "!vluch more
meteorological information from many more locations needs to be collected
and analysed before the estimates made here can be considered to have more
than illustrative value.

of

87

5. Influence of local meteorological factors on the effectiveness of an attack
with chemical weapons
In the model used here by way of illustration, it is supposed that 4 tons
of sarin are dropped at ground level along a 2-km line at right angles to the
mean wind direction, and that there is negligible cross-wind dispersion of
the aerosol cloud as a result of variations in wind direction about the mean,
so that it passes downwind as a 2-km wide band to the point at which the Ct
becomes too low to give a significant probability of a lethal effect.
It is assumed that the initial cloud extends from ground level to a height
of 10 metres. Since the concentration in this cloud will be inversely proportional to its downwind spread and since its time of passage downwind past
any point will be directly proportional to this spread, the Ct is independent
of the spread. When the wind speed is 2.5 mjsec the initial Ct of the postulated pattern of attack with sarin will be 1330 mg-minjm3 •
It appears that the probit lines of very toxic agents have high slopes.
It is legitimate therefore to take the critical distance as that at which the Ct
corresponds to an LD 50 . This Ct is referred to as the LCt50 • The probability
of death will amount almost to certainty for an agent of high pro bit slope
(5-10) when the Ct is only a little larger than the LCt50 , and the probability
of survival will be equally high when the Ct is only a little smaller than the
LCt50 •
When considering the factors that determine the distance that the cloud
can travel downwind before the Ct falls below the LCt50 , it is assumed that
the particles of aerosol are so fine that they do not settle out at all on the
ground or impact on vertical surfaces. This does not correspond with chemical warfare practice, but it enables one factor to be examined at a time.
Suppose that the atmospheric stability category is F in open country
and that the wind speed is 2.5 mfsec. It can then be calculated from Pasquill's curves that the cloud will have to have spread vertically to such an
extent that the concentration at 200 m altitude is 10% of that at ground
level in order that the initial Ct of 1330 mg-minjm3 at ground level shall
fall to 100 mg-minjm3 , which is estimated to be the LCt50 of sarin for man.
Vertical spread of this extent is achievable with the degree of atmospheric
stability assumed, but Pasquill has calculated that even after making
reasonable allowance for the more rapid spread expected in an urban area
it will not be achieved until the cloud has travelled 4-6 km.
Thus, in this state of atmospheric stability, dilution of the agent as the
result of atmospheric turbulence will play a trivial role in mitigating the
effect of sarin on an urban area.
On the other hand, if the stability state of the atmosphere falls into
category D in open country, it is estimated that the distance downwind at
which the ground level Ct of sarin would fall below the critical value would
be only about 1.5 km. Even at midnight there is a substantial chance of
88

this happening, and there is an appreciable chance of still more unstable
states making their appearance in the late hours of the night and the early
hours of the morning.
With an agent that is 10 or more times as toxic as sarin (and this category
includes VX and botulinal toxin) it is estimated that the reduction of Ct
below the effective value within 1.5 km would require an atmosphere
considerably more unstable than category B. In the United Kingdom, such
a degree of instability occurs rather infrequently and usually only near the
middle of the day.
6. Fall-out as a factor influencing the incidence of attack

The agents instanced as more toxic than sarin are VX, which is a nonvolatile liquid, and botulinal toxin, which is a solid that is soluble in water
and may therefore be expected to form droplets in most conditions of humidity. Droplets in an aerosol are always likely to encounter one another in
the course of their random motions, and when they meet there will be a
strong tendency for them to coalesce. The downward gravitational pull
on a drop is proportional to the cube of its radius, while the frictional
forces braking its fall under gravity are proportional to the square of
its radius; therefore, as drops grow they precipitate more rapidly out of
the air.
What will happen to the drops or droplets produced by a chemical
weapon will depend on the spectrum of drop sizes produced.
It appears that aerosols of chemical agents generated by bombs or by
spray-tanks are usually very coarse, consisting mostly of particles of more
than 100 Jl in diameter. It is only when the particle size is less than 10 Jl
in diameter that fall-out is slow.
Published data for such aerosols show an initial high rate of fall-out and
a subsequent decrease in the rate as they pass downwind. For present
purposes, it is assumed that the amount of material remaining in aerial
suspension falls by a factor of 9 in the first km of travel and by a factor
of 3 for each km thereafter. This gives the general rule that the amount
remaining suspended at a distance of K km from the source has been
reduced by a factor of 3 (K + 1).
What will actually happen in practice will depend on the precise droplet
spectrum produced by the weapon, but for moderate distances the empirical
rule suggested here is not likely to be very inaccurate. This rule gives a
direct measure of the fall in the relative Ct of the agent at different distances
downwind from the line of release, but it can only be applied directly to an
area of smooth ground. Relatively large droplets will impact on the vertical
surfaces as the air carrying them flows around obstructions.
For the model attack with 4 tons of sarin spread along 2 km, it has been
stated in section 5 that if the cloud is initially distributed uniformly between
89

the ground and a height of 10 m the initial Ct will be 1330 mg-min/m3 , so
that the distance. at which this would fall to 100 mg-min/m3 (the LCt50 of
sarin) is about 1.3 km. Thus, in travel through a built-up area in any
meteorological conditions which could cause any degree of vertical dispersion of the residual aerosol cloud, it is unlikely that the cloud could travel
more than 1 km before the Ct fell below the LCt50 of the agent.
For the more toxic agent VX (LCt50 = 10 mg-minjm3) the same density
of attack would result in the extension of the lethal zone (the area in which
Ct > LCt50) for a further 2 km, i.e., to 3 km downwind.
Among the poisons still more toxic than VX that might conceivably be
used as chemical agents is botulinal toxin, whose LCt50 in man is estimated
to be around 0.02 mg-min/m3 , and whose probit slope is st~ep. Assuming
that this agent is sufficiently stable to be disseminated by the types of
weapon considered here and to remain undetoxified in the aerosol state
(conditions that might be fulfilled through the use of suitable stabilizers, if
not already attainable with the untreated agent), the cloud would then travel
about 6 km downwind before its ground-level dosage fell below the LCt50 •
It is instructive to speculate on the effects of these kinds of attack if
weapons were used that were capable of disseminating the agent in a monodisperse aerosol, rather than the broad spectrum of droplets or particles
produced by the weapons considered above. It has been calculated that
only about 13% of a monodisperse, 5tt diameter aerosol would be deposited
on the ground during 20 km of downwind travel, under moderately stable
atmospheric conditions with a wind speed of 2.5 mfsec (Johnstone et al.,
1949). If this dosage-reducing factor is combined with the reduction due
to eddy diffusion under open-terrain conditions with atmospheric stability
F, the ground-level dosage after 20 km of travel can be calculated to be
about 1% of that at the source line. This means that the ground-level
dosage produced 20 km downwind by a source-strength equal to those
considered above would be about 13 mg-min/m3 , which corresponds to
slightly more than the LCt50 of VX.
In summary, 4 tons of sarin delivered along a 2-km line (open-terrain
atmospheric stability = category F, wind speed = 2.5 mfsec) would deliver
a Ct in excess of the LCt50 over about 2 km2 , while the corresponding areas
with VX and botulinal toxin would be 6 km2 and 12 km2 respectively.
With a monodisperse 5tt diameter aerosol of VX, the area would be slightly
greater than 40 km2 (Table 9).
It seems likely that an attacker would load on to an aircraft the maximum
permitted weight of weapons, even if this involved some possibility of loss
of efficiency by overhitting. It is therefore to be expected that the aircraft,
whatever their size, would attempt to lay down line sources containing
about 2 tons per km length, and that the effect would be to create lethal
zones of approximately 0.5-3 km2 per ton of agent, or about 0.1-0.75 km2
per ton of weapons, depending on whether sarin, VX, or botulinal toxin
90

were used. For the hypothetical weapon disseminating the monodisperse
5!-l diameter VX aerosol, the figures would be about 10 km2 per ton of VX,
or 2.5 km2 per ton of weapons. It seems likely, however, that the VXdisseminating equipment needed to generate a monodisperse aerosol of
this small droplet size would account for considerably more than 75% of
the weight of the \veapon, so that the lethal zone for VX might be considerably less than 2.5 km2 per ton of weapons.
7. Influence of the volatility of the agent

Where the vapour pressure of the agent is lo\v, as with VX, or negligible,
as with a bacterial toxin, fall-out during travel does not represent any
appreciable additional hazard, and the area coverage would be correspondingly reduced. Where the vapour pressure is high, however, as with sarin,
material that has been deposited on roads, roofs, walls, soil, and vegetation
may evaporate into the air and reinforce the hazard in the areas downwind
of the point of fall-out. It is not possible to estimate the magnitude of this
contribution to the effects of attack. It will be limited by two factors :
(1) some of the agent that falls out will not be able to evaporate because it
has dissolved in water films on various surfaces, because it has become
bound by adsorptive forces on the surfaces of solids, because it has penetrated into crevices or pores in solids, or because it has reacted chemically
with organic matter, living or dead; (2) in circumstances in which the
atmosphere is stable, surface temperatures will generally be too low to
permit appreciable evaporation.
All that it is possible to say with any confidence is that re-entry of deposited agent into the air in the form of vapour is not likely, in the case of
sarin, to come anywhere near to compensating for the fact that the LCt50
of sarin is 10 times that of VX, i.e., if the high-risk area for VX extends
downwind for 3 km, the high-risk area for sarin will extend downwind for
a substantially shorter distance.
8. Possibility of more efficient means of attack
It will have been noted that although VX has 10 times the LCt50 of
sarin (and is assumed to have a similar probit slope) it is by no means
10 times as effective when delivered in the pattern of attack considered here.
If one tenth as much VX as sarin were delivered per km the effects of the
two attacks would be similar, so that there would be considerable overhitting with VX in the pattern of attack adopted.
Four tons of sarin or VX seems to be more than could be put on to a
single bomber in a sufficient number of small bombs to create a continuous
source over a length of 2 km because of the weight of weapons hardware
required. But half this load of sarin would create a lethal zone of only a
91.

little less than 1 km in depth downwind. An aircraft much smaller than
a heavy bomber, carrying a multiplicity of very small VX bombs with a
total payload of only 0.2 tons of VX (which might mean 1-1.5 tons of
weapons) could cover the same area.
No consideration has been given to random attack with individual
bombs scattered over the target area, since this type of attack is much more
difficult to achieve than creating a line source and is bound to be less
effective.
An alternative mode of attack that could produce a line source is dispersal by means of an airborne spray-tank. Here the crucial factor is the
height of the release. By the time the aerosol, in its travel downwind, has
reached ground level, its droplets will be spread through a vertical height
greater than the height of release, and the ground area over which the Ct
will exceed the LCt50 is bound to be less than if the same weight of attack
had been released at ground level. Spray-tank delivery at ground level,
as is done with insecticides, would have the same disadvantages as indicated
above for small bomblets, and the effects would be similar.
It would appear from what has been said that the model of attack
considered would have the order of effectiveness that could and would be
achieved by a skilled aggressor furnished with the types of agent and weapons
mentioned.
9. Conclusions on the feasibility of an attack with chemical weapons on
urban areas
Even though it has been assumed that meteorological conditions would
be favorable and although an attempt has been made not to weight the
scales against the probable success of an attack, it is concluded that no
agent less toxic than the nerve gases is worth taking into consideration as
a means of making a surprise attack with present agents with a small
aircraft. A ton of small weapons of 20% payload dropped by such an
aircraft to form a 1-km line source would have very little effect outside the
area of drop if the toxicity of the agent equalled or were less than that of
sarin.
The factor limiting the effectiveness of the agents considered here is the
large droplet size produced by the weapons. If very small droplets could
be generated at ground-level by means that did not reduce the payload by
a large factor, the effectiveness could be considerably increased.
It is therefore concluded that the large range of agents described in
Annex 1 would be unlikely to be considered by a potential aggressor for
use against an urban target. If indeed one of these agents was considered
for any use at all, it would only be against some small specific target having
features that would prevent its rapid dissipation, or with the intention of
producing effects only in the immediate vicinity of the burst.
92

This conclusion is consistent with the fact that serious concern about
the chemical warfare threat did not appear until agents of the order of
toxicity of VX had been developed to the point where they might be used
in practice. It can be anticipated that military authorities will now seek
improvements in weapons delivery systems rather than more toxic agents.
10. Implications for protection

With a wind speed of 2.5 mfsec the cloud of agent would travel 150m
per min. It appears unlikely that, over the 3 km or so a VX cloud would
travel before becoming effectively non-lethal (when the source strength
is 2 tons/km), its spread along wind could have increased to as much as
1.5 km. If so, the time of passage of the cloud past any element of the
target would not be likely to exceed 10-15 minutes. Consequently, the
hazard would not persist for much longer than the duration of the attack.
In order to maintain the hazard for an appreciably longer period than that
due to fallout on the ground it would be necessary to maintain the attack
over a similar period, which would necessitate an overall weight of attack
of the same order as that needed when conventional weapons are used.
Prolonged attack with relays of weapons therefore seems unlikely to prove
attractive.
Thus, protective measures capable of mitigating the effects of very
short-lived gross contamination of the target by fine aerosols might be a
useful disincentive to potential users of chemical weapons against urban
areas. Spray and other methods of delivery resulting in large droplets that
would contaminate surfaces would require effective decontamination
measures as well.

B. HYPOTHESES

CONCERl'\l~G

BIOLOGICAL AGENTS

An exponential decay has been assumed for the biological agents as
follows: VtjVo = e·kt, where Vt and Vo =the viabilities at the time t
and time zero respectively, and k is a constant.
May et al., (1969) 1 have shown that organisms vary widely in their k
factor when exposed in open air at night (0-20°C, relative humidity above
65%). Under such conditions k for bacteria usually falls in the range 0.030.1 decay per minute (where 1 = 100%). Indoors, the decay rate is much
lower. Certain viruses are reported to have higher decay rates. Spores are
much more resistant and probably become stable within a few hours, so
that they persist for very long periods. Viruses containing lipids Carboviruses, influenza) are more resistant than lipid-free viruses. When biological
agents are used in the form of aerosols, viability can be markedly increased
by incorporating special stabilizers and other substances in order to provide
1

For further references see Benbough, J. E. (1969) J. gen. Viral., 4, 473-477.

93

particles with diameters in the range of about 1-7p (suitable for deep penetration into the lungs) and to ensure protection against adverse environmental influences (e.g., solar radiation, variability in humidity). In assigning
the k values listed in Table 7, it has therefore been assumed that such
aerosol stabilizers would be used. In addition, it has been assumed that
immediately after aerosolization (following bomblet explosion or spray
delivery) 95% of the organisms would be rendered ineffective by heat,
rapid initial decay, clumping, and sedimentation.
It is hoped that ~he use of high estimates of the early and progressive
losses of infectivity will have minimized the chances of over-estimating
potential casualty rates through assigning wrong values to such important
factors as infective doses for man and the effective payload of weapons.
Vaccine production laboratories can produce dry powder preparations
of Brucella containing more than 1.3 x 1011 organisms per gram. It thus
seems reasonable to postulate that in an attack with this agent some 50 kg
of powder containing at least 6 X 1015 organisms might be disseminated
along a 2-km line. Assuming an initial 95% loss of infectivity, this would
leave about 3 X 1014 infective organisms. If the infective cloud extended
initially for 10 m above ground and if the wind speed was 2.5 mfsec, the
initial Ct would be 108 organism-min/m3 , which means that a man over
whom the cloud passed would take in at least 106 organisms (inhalation at
10 litres per minute).
The ratio of payload (dry powder) to disseminating equipment and
medium may be as low as 1 : 40 for ground-functioning weapons so that
the weight of weapons required for delivery of 50 kg of dry powder could
TABLE 7. ASSUMED HUMAN INFECTIVE DOSES AND
AEROSOL DECAY RATES FOR BIOLOGICAL AGENTS

Disease caused
by agent

'

Venezuelan equine
encephalitis
Tick-borne encephalitis
Yellow fever
Influenza
Epidemic typhus
Rocky Mountain spotted fever '
Q fever
Brucellosis
Plague
Tularemia
Anthrax

Assumed 50%
human infective
dose (I Dso) a

10 OOOX guinea-pig ID 50
10 ooox TCID 50 b
10000xEIDso c
10000XEID 50 c
5 OOOx EID 50 c
5 OOOx EIDso c
100 organisms
10 000 organisms
10 000 organisms
250 organisms
100 000 spores

k factor
(decay per minute)
for aerosol
kx100=%)

assi~ned

0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.001

a ID 50 = the dose that would cause overt disease in 50% of exposed individuals
b TCI D = tissue culture infective dose
c El D = egg infective dose

94

be as much as2 tons, easily carried by one bomber. Proportionately higher
payloads would be possible with spray delivery.
The same general input as given for Brucella to give an initial Ct of
108 organism-min/m3 (or, for viruses, lOS infective dose-minjm3) has been
assumed for all the remaining agents in Tables 7 and 10. For some but not
all of these agents production in the form of powders that would retain high
infectivity over adequate periods of time would require the use of advanced
technological procedures. Such procedures are well within the competence
of several countries, and can ultimately be achieved by many more.
Table 7 also shows the assumptions made for each of the biological
agents for which calculations have been made in Table 10. The estimates
given in Table 10 take into account case fatality and morbidity rates and the
probable effects of therapy (see Annex 2 for details of individual diseases).
Where the probit slopes of biological agents are known they are low.
This means that as the concentration of agent in the aerosol decreases
during its passage downwind there is a progressive fall in effectiveness ;
this is in contrast to what happens with a chemical agent of high probit
slope, where there is only a small area of gradually decreasing effectiveness
between the upwind area of very high toxicity and the downwind area of
very low toxicity. Casualty estimates for biological attacks have therefore
been based on the assumption that within the area covered the overall
probably of a primary effect on an unprotected person would be 50%.
This may be a slightly conservative estimate. But as a very massive
attack would be needed to raise the mean probability over the target area
of causing incapacitating or lethal disease to 95% and, as such a massive
attack would have unpredictable consequences for a very large distance
downwind of the target, it is doubtful whether the 50% assumption would
be in substantial error when applied to the kind of attack under discussion.

C. ESTIMATES OF NUMBERS OF CASUALTIES
There are two important factors that influence the estimates of the
number of persons at risk.
The first is the probable degree of exposure of the population to the
drifting clouds of pollutant. If it is assumed that the population lacks any
kind of defensive equipment or training against an attack with chemical or
biological weapons, protection would be furnished only by the buildings
that people inhabit and by the shielding of occupied open areas by tall
buildings and other obstacles to the travel of the clouds. In many instances,
people inside buildings may not be much better off than people outside.
Although the concentration of pollutant inside a building will rise more
slowly than that outside, and to a lower peak, it will also fall more slowly,
and the Ct dosages experienced inside and outside the building may be
95

TABLE 8. NUMBERS OF PERSONS AT RISK FROM AN ATTACK WITH CHEMICAL OR
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS ON THE MOST DENSELY POPULATED AREAS
OF TYPICAL URBAN TARGETS
Industrially developed couptry
Population
of town

Industrially developing country

Type of area a
I

I

II

I

Type of area a
Ill

I

I

II

I

Ill

500 000

50 000

75 000

120 000

180 000

200 000

250 000

1 000 000

60 000

100 000

180 000

100 000

160 000

250 000

5 000 000

150 000

300 000

500 000

60 000

150 000

250 000

a The types of area selected are the most densely populated areas of the sizes specified
below in the different kinds and sizes of town :
Area I extends from an attack line 1 km upwind of the town centre to 2 km downwind of the town
centre, and is 2 km wide
Area II extends from 1 km upwind of the town centre to 9 km downwind of the town centre, and
is 2 km wide
Area Ill extends from an attack line 10 km upwind of the town centre to 10 km downwind of the
town centre and is 2 km wide
See Section D for explanation of population .density.

very similar. The higher the ventilation rate of the building, the higher will
be the peak concentration of the agent inside. Protection of the occupants
may none the less be possible if the ventilation rate can be reduced as soon
as there is warning of the attack or if the ventilation input can be filtered
to some extent.
TABLE 9. EFFECTS OF AN ATTACK ALONG A 2-KM LINE USING
UP TO 4 TONS OF CHEMICAL AGENT REQUIRING 15-20 TONS OF WEAPONS
Chemical agent

Area affected c

I

Sa-rin a

2 km 2 in Area I

vx

Area I (= 6 km 2)

Botulinal toxin (if adequately stabilized) b

Intermediate between Areas I and II
(approx. 12 km 2)

VX, dispersed as a monodisperse
5 1.1 diameter aerosol
(if technically feasible) b

Area Ill (approx. 40 km 2)

a Agents less toxic than sarin would produce effects only in the immediate vicinity of the
explosion of a weapon
b A larger weight of weapons, perhaps 2-3 times as great, might be required to deliver the
botulinal toxin or to produce the fine VX aerosol because of the greater amount of hardware required
for such purposes
·

c See Table 8 for definitions of areas I, II and Ill.

96

'!!

·.,

,_,

Another factor that has to be taken into account is'tlie distribution of
dosages over the area covered by the cloud. An even distribution would
-be improbable, because the weapons used would be unlikely to set up a
cloud of uniform density, and also because surface irregularities in the path
of the cloud would undoubtedly alter the Ct dosages e,xperienced at par.ticular poinJs. If the cloud had to rise over. 'an obstruction due to tall
buildings, the open area downwind of this. woUld ,be equivalent to a poorly
ventilated enclosure in. which the concentration or agent would not reach
th'at in the general cloud.
In view of these uncertainties, the casualty estimates for chemical warfare
death from priare presented in Tables 8 and 9 as populations at risk
mary infection in the most densely populated areas of ·urban .targets. It
is thought that non-lethal casualties would be much smaller in number
than lethal casualt!es. In an attack with biological agents, the probability
of infection of an exposed man may be much less than unity', even in a
concentrated attack, and the proportion of fatal infections can vary greatly according to the infecting agent. In order to display the consequences
of this sort of variation, the estimates of casualties from biological warfare
have been set out in Table 10 as estimates of the deaths and the non-fatal
infections that would ensue if the populations at risk received no warning,
and had no protection of any kind.

of

D. POPULATION MODELS
To illustrate the public health implications, 6 hypothetical cities have
been taken, 3 typifying economically developed communities (e.g., in
Europe or North America), and 3 typifying developing areas (e.g., in SouthEast Asia, the Eastern Mediterranean, or South America). The 3 cities in
each of these groups have 500 000, 1 000 000 and 5 000 000 inhabitants,
respectively.
These hypothetical cities have been made to conform to the Clark (1951,
1957) model of urban population distribution, in which it is assumed that
the greatest density of population is in a small area surrounding the centre
of the city and that population density falls off exponentially with increasing
distance from this area. By integration of population density over areas
of the sizes shown in the legend to Table 8, those areas of each size that
have the greatest population density can be found for each kind of city.
The two parameters of the model, the maximum central population
density and the coefficient of e~ponential decay, change with changes in the
total population, but not in the same way in developed and developing
countries. As a consequence, the maximum population at risk in attacks
of the kind postulated here varies with city size in different ways in the two
kinds of city.
97

TABLE 10. ESTIMATED POSSIBLE PRIMARY EFFECTS OF LIMITED (SINGLE BOMBER)

Disease caused by
agent a

Downwind
carriage of
lethal or
incapacitating
con centrations c

Pattern
of
attack
(type
of
Aparea) b proximate
extent

Venezuelan" equine encephalitis (similar effects can
be expected from Rift Valley
fever, chikungunya" and
O.'nyong-nyong)

I

Tick-borne

(far Eastern)
(similar effects
can be expected from Japanese encephalitis and yellow fever)

I

Influenza, antigenically
modified, non-virulent
strain

I

Epidemic typhus

II

Rocky Mountain spotted
fever

II

Brucellosis

II

Plague

II

Q fever

Ill

Tularaemia

Ill

Anthrax

Ill

~ncephalltis

Approximate
time

1" kin 5-7 min

Number of
Population

1

I

D

100

2
I

10 000

3

I.

D

100

I

12000

I

D

300

I

30 000

- - - - - - --- --- - - - --- --- 1 km 5-7 min

2 500

10 000

3 000

12 000

7 500

------ --------- ~ --- 1 km 5-7 min

50

'10 000

50

12 000

50

30 000

30 000

- - - --- - - - - - - - - - --- --- 5 km 30 min

2 500

30000

3 000

37 000

8000 125 000

'

~

--- --- --- --- --- --- --- --5 km 30 min

2 000

30 000

2 500

37 000

7 500 125 000

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - --- --- - - 10 km

1 h

150

27 000

200

10 km

1 h

6 500

27 000

12 000

>20 km

>2 h

50

60 000

100

50 000

600 150 000

--- --- --- --- --- --- --- ----- --- --- ---

50 000

-

90 000

36 000 150 000

--- - - 250 250 000

- - - --- - - - --- - - - --- --- - - >20 km

>2

~· ' 4 500

60 000

7 000 ' 90 000,

19.000 250 000

------ --- --- --- ------ --»20 km

)) 2 h

24 000

60 000

36000

90 000 100 000 250 000

* Approximately 5"0 kg of dried powder containing 6 x 1015 organisms are assumed to have
been aerosolized to form a band 2 km long at right angles to the wind direction under tylle F meteorological conditions.
a For detailed de"scriptions, see Annex 2.
b See Table 8 for definitions of attack patterns (areas) I to Ill.
c For assumptions on which calculations are based, see pp. 88-91 and 93-95.
d The figures are rounded estimates, based on the number of individuals at risk and taking
into account such factors as an assumed attack rate of 50%, the case fatality rates, and for some
of the agents the use of antibiotics as described under "Remarks" and in Annexes 2 and 3.
D = deaths
I = incapacitated, including deaths

98

BIOLOGICAL WARFARE ATTACK ON UNPROTECTED CIVILIAN POPULATION GROUPS*

casualties d
group e

Remarks

4

D
400

I

5

I

D

35 000

6

I

200

I

D
20 000

100

10 000

r--------- --------'-----1-------------------1
9 500

35 000

6 000

20 000

3 000

10 000

r---------------1-----------------1
100

35 000

100

20 000

50

10 000

r--- ---------------1--------------------1
19 000

85 000

15 000

65 000

14 000

60 000

Use of antibiotic therapy considered to cause
reduction of mortality by 70% and 10 %for economically developed and developing communities,
respectively.

----------------------------1
11 500

85 000

9 000

65 000

7 500

60 000

Same as above for epidemic typhus.

----------------------------------500 100 000

400

80 000

350

75 000

55 000 100 000

44 000

80 000

41 000

75 000

----------------------------------150 125 000

150 125 000

150 125 000

Same as above for epidemic typhus.
No calculations made for after two hours; part of
infective cloud would persist downwind.

---------------------------30 000 125 000

30 000 125 000

30 000 125 000

Same as above for epidemic typhus. No calculations made for after two hours ; part of infective
cloud would persist downwind.

-----------------------------------1
95 000 125 000

95 000 125 000

95 000 125 000

No calculations made for after two hours; part of
infective cloud would persist far downwind. Use
of antibiotic therapy considered to cause reduction
of mortality by 50% and 5% for economically
developed and developing countries, respectively.

e The population groups are defined as follows:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban

population
population
population
population
population
population

of
of
of
of
of
of

approximately 500 000 in economically developed country
approximately 1 000 000 in economically developed country
approximately 5 000 000 in economically developed country
approximately 500 000 in developing country
approximately 1 000 000 in developing country
approximately 5 000 000 in developing country

For further explanations of the population model, see p. 97.

99

REFERENCES
Clark, C. (1951) J. roy. Statist. Soc., 114A, 490-496
Clark, C. (1957) Bull. Inst. int. Statist., 36 (4), 60-68
Ehrlich, R. & Miller, S. (1968) Arch. environ. Hlth, 16, 469-471
Finney, D. J. (1952) Probii analysis: a statistical treatment of the sigmoid response cune,
2nd ed., Cambridge, University Press
Finney, D. J. (1964) Statistical method in biological qssay, 2nd ed., London, Griffin
Glassman, H. N. (1966) Bact. Rev., 30, 657-659
Hornick, R. B. & Woodward, T. E. (1966) Trans. Amer. din. cliniat: Ass., 78, 10:16
Johnstone, H. F., Winsche, W. E. & Smith, L. W. (1949) Chem. Rev., 44, 353-371
Lincoln, R. E. & DeArmon, I. A. jr (1959) J. Bact., 78, 640-650
May, K. R., Druett, H. A. & Packman, L. P. (1969) Nature (Lond.), 221, ll46-1i47
McElroy, J. L. & Pooler, F. jr (1968) St. Louis Dispersion Study, vol. 2. Analysis,
Washington, Consumer Protection and Environmental Health Service, US Public
Health Service
Pasquill, F. (1962) Atmospheric d(ffusion: the dispersion of windborne material from
industrial and other sources, London, Van Nostrand
Tigertt, W. D., Behenson, A. S. & Gochenour, W. S; (1961) Bact. Rev., 25, 285-293

100

ANNEX 4

MEDICAL AND PUBLIC HEALTH EFFECTS
OF ATTACK WITH CHEMICAL
OR BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
INTRODUCTION
It is stressed that the following attempt to consider some of the potential
medical and public health problems that would be produced by an attack
on a major city with chemical or biological weapons deals only with the
minimal attack model described in Annex 3 (a few bombers for chemical
agents, and one bomber for biological agents). A maximal attack, or an
attack with chemical and biological combined with nuclear weapons or
even with conventional explosives or incendiaries, would produce problems
quantitatively and qualitatively different from those discussed here, as
would repeated attacks with chemical or biological weapons. A brief
general discussion of the problems will be followed by an attempt to, illustrate some of them more explicitly by descriptions of hypothetical attacks
with:
(1) a lethal and incapacitating antibiotic-sensitive biological weapon
without secondary cases (tularaemia);

(2) a lethal and incapacitating antibiotic-sensitive biological weapon
with secondary cases (pneumonic plague) ; and

(3) a lethal chemical agent (VX).
These descriptions will sketch the possible consequences of attacks on
cities with a population of half a million and of 5 million in an economically
advanced country and in a developing country.
Because. the effects. of the widespread use of such weapons have,. fortunately, never been tested, the principles described and the hypothetical
attacks are extrapolations from limited information. Extrapolations from
naturally occurring epidemics can, however, provide limited clues to the
effects of induced epidemics.

101

GENERAL PRINCIPLES
(1) Problems in preparing for defence against an attack
Medical and public health preparations for meeting a chemical attack on
a city would include :
(a) the stockpiling of drugs to counter the effects of the agents that
might be used (e.g., atropine and the oximes for the nerve gases);
(b) the preparation of additional· hospital beds to handle a sudden influx
of casualties ;

(c) the training of additional health personnel to treat the casualties ;
(d) the supply to each person of protective equipment (e.g., gas masks)
or antidotes (e.g., syringes loaded with atropine for self-injection); and

(e) preparation for decontamination.
Preparations for defence against a. biological attack would include : ,J,.
(a) the immunization of the population against agents which might be

used;
(b) the stockpiling of antibiotics and other drugs;

(c) the preparation of additional hospital beds and training of man-:
power;
(d) the strengthening of diagnostic stations ; and
(e) preparation for decontamination.

Preparing against an attack would introduce other types of probl~qt.
Stockpiling of vaccines and drugs is very difficult and expensive, because
they~ lo'se their potency with time and must be continually replaced. ·Preparation of additional beds and personnel diverts resources t"rom ·other
medical and public health purposes. While self-injecting syringes may be
feasible in a highly trained and disciplined group, such as a body of troops,
they would be unlikely to be effective and might be highly dangerous in the
general population. Immunization of the population against a large number
of potential agents is likely to induce .considerable morbidity and some·
deaths due to· the immunization procedure itself ; it is also unlikely to be
effective because an enemy could use an agent against which no immunizaW
tion had been given or increase the dose ofthe agent sufficiently to over..:
whelm existing immunity. Finally, many of these methods would cause
anxiety in the population and might lead to maladaptive responses (sd~·
Annex 6 on psychosocial effects).
102

(2) Immediate problems in the event of an attack
The response by medical and public health authorities would depend ,on
the nature of the attack, the amount of warning given, the period of time
that elapsed between the attack itself and identification of the agent, the
nature of the population and the environment in which the weapons wen"<
used, and the resources available. Placing large masses of people in quarantine, of doubtful value in any case, would be impossible in most instances.
In almost all cases difficult priority decisions would have to be made.
For example, if antibiotics were in limited quantity, who would be first to
receive them? If hospital beds were limited, would those occupying them
be discharged to make way for the casualties ? If health manpower was
limited, from what tasks would it be diverted?
(3) Problems after the atta:ck
Mter the primary problems of the attack had been dealt with, there
would be a number of secondary and residual problems. Certain agent~,
such as the nerve gases, cause anoxia which can produce cerebral damage,
leaving neurological sequelae even though the person's life is saved. Biological agents spread from person to person can give rise to secondary attack
waves which, in diseases like plague, may continue for months or years after
the event. Massive attacks may alter the ecological relationship between
man and lower animal vectors of disease and the human microbial flora,
thereby initiating outbreaks of diseases previously latent. Decontamination
would be required for persistent chemical and biological agents.

EXAMPLES BASED ON HYPOTHETICAL SITUATIONS
The following analysis of the medical and public health effects of hypothetical attacks will illustrate some of the problems more explicitly. The
attacks are postulated as being on cities with a population of half a million
and 5 million in economically developed and developing countries. The
population dispersal would be according to the model used in Annex 3
(Table 8 and p. 97).
Assumptions on availability of health resources
(A)

A city of 5 million in an economically developed country could be
assumed to contain :

(1) doctors : approximately 1 per 500 population, i.e., approximately
10 000;
(2) nursing personnel including auxiliaries : approximately 60 000 ;
103

(3) hospital beds :approximately 10 per 1 000 population (50 000 beds)
in the city a1;1d approximately 5 per 1 000 population (15 000 beds) in the
immediately surrounding conurbation (assuming 3 million people in the
surrounding atea). Of these beds, 10% would be vacant atthe time of the
attack and an addi~ional 30% could be made available. in· a few hours by
discharging selectively ; thus 25 000 beds could be quickly available. In
addition, 25 000 more beds could be mobilized in other institutions.
(B)

A city of 5 million in a developing country could· be assumed to
contain:

(1) doctbt'S: approximately 7 000 (doctors are much more numerous
in large cities than in surrounding areas);
(2) nursing personnel including auxiliaries : approximately 7 000 ;
(3) hospital beds : approximately 2 per 1 000 population (10 000 beds)
in the city and approximately 0.5 per 1 000 population (2 000 beds) in the
surrounding conurbation (assuming 4 million people in the surrounding
areas). Of these essentially none would be vacant at the time of the attack
and only 5% could be niade available in a short time : thus only 600 beds
could be quickly available: Perhaps 5 000 more beds could be mobilized.
'

(C) A city of' 500 000 in ~n economically developed country could be
assumed to contaiq :
(1) doctors.: approximately 1 000;

(2) nursing personnel including auxiliaries : approximately 6 000 ;
(3) · hospital beds : in the city, 8 per 1· 000 (4 000 beds) ; in the surrounding area 4 per 1 000 (800 beds) ; total, approximately 5 000 beds. If 40%
were made available; :there would thus be 2 000 beds. In addition, 2 000
more beds bould perhaps be mobilized.
(D) A city of 500 000 in a developing coun'try could be assumed to con-

tain:

·

·

(1) doctors: approximately 250;
(2) nursing personnel including auxiliaries: approximately 200;
(3) hospit11lbeds: in the city,l per 1 000 (500 beds); in the surrounding
area 0.5 per 1 000 (1.50 beds)-a total of approximately 650 beds. If 5%
were available, there would thus be 30 beds. Perhaps 1 000 beds could be
'
mobilized in' other institutions.
'•' .. ! ; '

104

A. TULARAEMIA

1. Assumptions about infectivity, virulence and antibiotic sensitivity of strain
used
There is now a variety of tularaemia strains that could be used for
biological warfare, including antibiotic-resistant strains and strains with a
reduced lethality. It is assumed that the strain used would have the following
effects and characteristics :
(a) Illness would occur in 50% of untreated persons inhaling 25 or
more tularaemia organisms (Table 10, Annex 3); ordinarily, hospitalization
would be required for about half of these people (with pleuropneumonia
and other complications).
(b) A 25% case fatality rate would occur in untreated persons who
developed the clinical disease.

(c) The strain would be sensitive to antibiotics.
2. Effect on a city of 5 million in an economically developed country

Exposure
Taking the reduction factor variables into account, if approximately
500 000 people were exposed to 50% infective doses (ID 50), at least 250 000
clinical cases could be expected. Many more would probably occur because
of the very large number of doses to which most of the population would.
be .exposed.
Flight from the city
It is estimated that about a third of the entire population would flee
from the city over the first 48 hours. The remaining population, whether
actively exposed or not, would demand antibiotics over the first 48 hours.
Preventive treatment
About 1 million people in all would need preventive chemotherapy for
10 days.
About 50 000 exposed people, for one reason or another, would not
start treatment within 48 hours even if it were available.
Morbidity and mortality
Of the 250 000 clinical cases that could be expected and would receive
antibiotics within 48 hours, 10% (25 000) would need hospitalization and
about 1% (2 500) would die.
·
Of the 50 000 for whom antibiotic therapy would not. start within
48 hours, 50% (25 000) would need hospitalization and about 7-10% (2 000)
105

would die. In all, about 60 000 would need hospitalization and about
4 500 would die.
Burial problems
Assuming 4 500 deaths spread over 10 days, the authorities of such a
city should be capable of coping with the situation.
Hospitalization problems
The 60 000 who would require hospitalization would not requite it all
at once and it appears that the 50 000 beds that might be mobilized could
probably accommodate them, although not without displacing a considerable number of less acutely ill patients.
Manpower needs
(a) For the hospitalized patients, 2 doctors, 4 nurses, and 10 other
personnel would be needed per 100 beds. For 50 000 beds, 1 000 doctors,
2 000 nurses, and 5 000 other personnel would be needed.
(b) The overall requirements would be for about 2 000 doctors, 3 000
nurses and 10 000 other personnel. In a modern industrial city with a
population of 5 million, there would be about 10 000 doctors and 60 000 nurses and other health personnel. Assuming that the health personnel fled in
about the same proportion as the rest of the population (one-third) and that
the health personnel received antibiotics early so there was little morbidity
or mortality among them, the city would be left with 7 000 doctors and
40 000 nurses and other personnel. This should be sufficient to meet the
needs of the victims and to maintain a reasonable level of care in the rest
of the population. In addition, personnel could be brought in from other
cities. Of course, if panic broke out and social disorganization developed,
it might prove impossible to bring the medical resources and the people who
needed them together effectively.

3. Effect on a city of 5 million in a developing country
Exposure
Of 250 000 people exposed to the attack, approximately 125 000 would
develop the disease.
Flight from the city
It may be assumed that about half the population would make their way
out of the city within 48 hours after the attack had become known.
Chemotherapy
Much smaller quantities of antibiotics would be available than in the
economically advanced city. Assuming that there were only enough

106

antibiotics to treat 10% of the clinical cases and partially treat an additional
40%, there would be no treatment for 50% of the people exposed. The
resultant mortality would involve about 30 000 people over a period of
about 10 days. Hospitalization would be required for about 60 000 severely
ill cases.
Burial problems
3 000 deaths per day would unquestionably cause severe body disposal
problems in such a city.
Hospitalization problems
The problem of hospitalizing those suffering from the attack would be
completely unmanageable.
4. Effect on a city of 500 000 in an economically developed country
There would be a proportionally higher exposure rate in the smaller city
than in the metropolis (Table 10, Annex 3). In economically developed
countries the medical care resources in a city of half a million inhabitants
are roughly proportional to those in a city of 5 million. The treatment of a
proportionally greater number of casualties with proportionally the same
resources would increase the problems. Possibly manageable in the larger
city, they would be much more difficult to manage in the smaller city. On
the other hand, evacuation would be easier and it would be simpler to bring
in health personnel from the outside.
·
5. Effect on a .city of 500 000 in a developing country
The casualties would be proportionally higher than in the city of 5 million, but the difference would not be as great as in economically advanced
countries. Medical resources are propoitionally very much more scarce in
smaller cities in developing countries. The combination of a proportionally
somewhat higher number of casualties with very much lower resources
would make the situation even more difficult than that in the larger city.

B. PNEUMONIC PLAGUE
1. Assumptions about infectivity, virulence and antibiotic sensitivity of strain
used
(a) Clinical infection would be produced in an unprotected person
inhaling 1 000 organisms or more with an attack rate of 50%.
(b) Of those developing clinical disease, about three-fourths would
ordinarily require hospitalization and death would occur in about 80% of
untreated persons.
107

(c) If an antibiotic-sensitive strain were used, •reasonably prompt treatment with antibjotics would reduce the need for hospitalization to about
50% of clinical cases and the case fatality rate by 70% and 10% respectively
in developed and developing countries (Table 10, Annex 3).
(d) Person-to-person inhalation spread would occur, but could be
prevented with reasonable effectiveness by the use of antibiotic prophylaxis
and isolation of cases and contacts.
(e)

Hospitalization would last about two weeks in non-fatal cases.

(f) In non-fatal cases there would be no residual ill effects.

2. Level of preparedness against an attack

Two different levels of preparedness are assume9 :
(a) Antibiotics are stockpiled and contingency plans for their rapid
administration have been prepared.
(b) No special stockpiles of antibiotics or other

pr~parations

have been

made.
3. Effect on a city of 5 million in an economically advanced country with
antibiotics available

Flight from the city
It is likely that about a third of the population would attempt to flee,
even though chemotherapy was promptly offered to those exposed and antibiotic pr~phylaxis to the rest of the population. The authorities might
attempt to block extension of the disease to other cities by trying to stop
this flight, but would probably be largely unsuccessful; liVen in an advanced
country.
Treatment
Immediate treatment of· exposed· persons and· all th~ other inhabitants
of the city with tetracycline or chloramphenicol would be attempted. Since
these drugs can be taken orally, few medical personnel would be needed ;
distribution centres would be required, as well as some means of identifying
those who had already been given the drug.
Morbidity and mortality
With prompftreatinent of the 150 000 clinieal cases (Annex 3, Table 10)
there would be about 36 000 deaths, but hospitalization and isolation would
be required for 80 000-100 000 people. Secondary. cases would occur
amongst the rest< of tht~ population and the proportion might be as high as
10% despite prophylactic tetracycline, thus possibly affecting as many as
108

500 000 additional people. In all some 500 000 people might require hospitalization and over 100 000 people might die. These hospitalizations and
deaths would, however, be spread over many weeks in successive waves.
Despite the blockade, some patients with plague would reach other cities :
the. secondary outbreaks of plague developing in the cities should be fairly
easy to contain in an advanced country.

Burial problems
Burial facilities would be taxed and some difficulties could be expected.

Hospitalization problems
The hospitalized cases would be spread over a long period, but each
patient would have to spend at least 2-3 weeks in hospital. Consequently,
hospital beds would be unlikely to be able to accommodate in the early
stages more than a third of those who might; normally warrant hospitalization and probably no more than a half in the secondary wave.

Manpower problems
The city should be able to deal with manpower problems, although
severe social disruption could be expected.
4. Effect on a city of 5 million in a developing country with a small supply
of antibiotics

Flight from the city
It is likely that over 50% of the population would attempt to flee,
and it would probably be harder for the authorities to stop their flight than
in the economically advanced countries.

Treatment
Even though a limited supply of drugs was available, distribution and
persuasion problems would be much greater in a developing country than
in an advanced country.

Morbidity and mortality
Both morbidity and mortality would be much higher, with many more
secondary cases. An overall case fatality of 50-70% could be expected.
With successive epidemic waves occurring, 250 000 deaths might result.

Hospitalization problems
Facilities and manpower resources would be totally inadequate.
109

C. NERVE GAS-VX

1. Assumptions about the extent of morbidity and mortality (Annex 1 and
Annex 3)
(a) Of those who inhaled a dose of 10 mg-min/m3 or who received
2-10 mg of liquid VX on the skin, 50% would die unless intensive medical

therapy and decontamination were carried out within seconds or minutes
after exposure. An additional 25% would die unless intensive medical
care and decontamination were instituted within minutes to hours a:fter the
exposure; the remaining 25% would survive with decontamination and
supportive care.
(b) the most critical period is seconds to minutes after exposure. After
this there is little that can be done for most of those exposed to doses in or
greater than the range mentioned.
(c)· A persistent agent such as ,VX presents a grave danger to those.
attempting to reach the casualties and to others entering the area of contamination without appropriate protective equipment. Contaminated medical
facilities would be useless for a long period after the attack.
(d) Atropine and oximes may be stockpiled, but would be almost
useless unless immediately available and unless training in self-administration
had been given and large numbers of health personnel had been instructed
in their use.
2. Effect on a city of5 million in an economically advanced country (Annex 3,
Tables 8 and 9)
Casualties
In such a city, if 150 000 people were exposed to a lethal concentration
ofVX, 80 000 could be assumed to die before any help arrived, 35 000 could
perhaps be saved with prompt administration of atropine and oximes and
heroic supportive care, and the remaining 35 000 might be saved by drugs
and general supportive care.
Morbidity and mortality
It is extremely unlikely that in such an attack many of the 70 000 not
immediately killed would be saved. There would probably be about
120 000 deaths and about 10 000 hospitalizations. Many of the survivors
would require extraordinary care if they were to be saved or preserved from
residual damage due to anoxia ..
Burial problems
Most of those who died would do so almost immediately, and the
120 000 deaths would therefore occur in the course of one or two days.
It would probably take a city of this type about two weeks to cope with
110

this number of deaths, unless considerable outside help was brought in.
The persistence of liquid VX in the area of densest concentration would
make collection of the bodies and burial a hazardous undertaking without
excellent protection for the personnel. The extent of putrefaction prior to
burial would depend on the delay and the temperature.
Hospitalization problems

The city would barely be able to cope with the 10 000 patients requiring
hospitalization. These individuals would require intensive care and large
numbers of personnel.
In addition, many of the hospitals would be contaminated with VX and
so be unusable. The precise proportion is impossible to predict, but as many
as 25% of hospital beds might be affected, since these are concentrated
near the centre of the city. Further complicating the problems is the fact
that at least 10% ofmedical personnel (probably closer to 20%, since they
too are more concentrated near the centre of the city) would themselves be
casualties.
Rehabilitation problems

,Some survivors would have residual effects. The number is indeterminate
but ,rnight be .of the order of 1 000 and it would severely test the rehabilitatiqn' facilities .of the city.
3. Effect on a city of 5 million in a developing country (Annex 3, Tables 8
and 9)
Casualties
It bould be assumed that 60 000 people would have been exposed to a
lethal dose of VX. Since it is quite clear that very few of the victims would
receive adequate medical care, it is likely that 50 000 or more of these
victims would die. Most of the remainder would require hospitalization
and intensive care.

Morbidity and mortality

Those who survived the initial period would require intensive medical
and nursing care, with atropine and oximes, respirators, intravenous fluids
and other therapy. Even if the drugs were available, it is extremely unlikely
that the personnel or equipment would be available for the purpose.
Burial problems

Fifty thousand deaths at once would be unmanageable and burial of
the bodies would take many weeks of effort. The burial problem would
depend on the temperature and on the protection available for the personnel.
lll

Hospitalization .problems

Clearly most of those who required hospitalization could not receive
the intensive cl!re needed. Probably, only those requiring minimal care
would reach the. hospital alive,
Manpower problems

Despite the smaller number of survivors, medical personnel in the city
would probably be incapable of dealing with them.
Rehabilitation problems

The. low number of survivors likely suggests that the number of patients
requiring rehabilitation would proba,bly be much smaller than in a city of
the same size in an economically advanced country. No rehabilitation
facilities would be likely to be available in the city, and the victims would
have to be sent to other. countries for rehabilitation.
4. Effect on a city of 500 000 in an economically advanced country (Annex 3,
Tables 8 and 9)
It is clear that the hospitals, the medical personnel and the rehabilitation
facilities of the attacked city could not manage in any significant way to
deal with the casualties or the burial of the approximately 40 000 bodies
that would result from the attack.

5. Effect on a city of 500 000 in a developing country (Annex 3, Tables 8
and 9)

The medical resources available, already far less than in a larger city,
would be further reduced by the attack, and it is conceivable that less than
half of the already minimal manpower and facilities would be functioning.
Most of those exposed (180 000) would simply have to be left to their own
devices and the majority would probably die.

112

ANNEX 5

SABOTAGE OF WATER SUPPLIES
INTRODUCTIO~

Various methods of contaminating a public water supply, including
aerial attack and sabotage on the ground, have been considered in constructing a model for quantitative assessment of possible use of chemical
and biological weapons. These include the introduction of a biological or
a chemical agent into (a) the water source at the intake or treatment works,
(b) a raw-water or treated-water reservoir, and (c) a transmission main, by
injection. It would appear that the third method of contamination would
be potentially the most devastating in effect, difficult to prevent and to
detect, and feasible in practice in many water systems. One other method,
perhaps the most damaging of all, would be the subornation of waterworks staff and injection of the agent within the treatment works, at the
same time sabotaging the control and detection procedures. This possibility
has not been taken into consideration in the following model because it
would require very special preparations and arrangements on the part of
the attacker, coupled with the unlikely convergence of a set of particularly
favourable circumstances.
The introduction of a contaminating agent into an open reservoir, which
would at first sight seem to be the simplest way of affecting a large number
of consumers, would be unlikely to produce anything like the widespread
devastation possible by controlled injection into a trunk main, and the
effects would be far less predictable.
An attempt has been made to \Vork out a pattern of drinking water
consumption, and thence to forecast the numbers of people who would be
affected by sabotage of this nature before preventive measures to counteract
the contamination could be taken. The following assumptions have been
made:
1. The contaminating agent belongs to one of the following three types :
(a) the typhoid bacillus, which produces no recognizable symptoms for

about 1 week ;
(b) botulinal toxin, type A, which would produce no recognizable symptoms until 6 or 8 hours after ingestion and, in a stabilized form, would resist
denaturation by the elements found in a normal water supply (see Annex 1);
113

(c) LSD, which produces recognizable symptoms within 2 hours after
ingestion.
All these have the common factor of being virtually impossible to detect
by conventional means available to the average waterworks. All can produce
effects in low concentrations, and therefore require a relatively small bulk
of initial contaminant to be introduced.
2. The sabotage has been prepared well in advance, the saboteur has a
thorough knowledge of the water system, and the point of injection into
the mains has been selected so as to reach the maximum number of people
possible. This point of injection is after the water has left the treatment
plant.
3. There is no chlorine residual in the mains (as is the case in many
countries) to reduce the viability of the agent ; alternatively, the disinfecting
property of this residual has been counteracted by the simultaneous application of a dechlorinating agent such as sodium thiosulfate.
4. The attack is without warning and no special precautions have been
taken by the waterworks authority.
5. The size of the population to be attacked has been arbitrarily selected
in accordance with what is felt to be within the capacity of a single act of
sabotage.
In the case of contamination by the typhoid· bacillus, the limiting
condition has been taken as the quantity of culture to be injected. The
assumption has been made that 1 kg of freeze-dried culture is introduced
into the system of a large city (population one million or more) through a
main feeding a sector of the distribution system.
For botulinal toxin and LSD, a town of 50 000, or a similar sized segment
of a larger city, has been assumed. Scaling down to small populations may
be taken as proportional, with a slight increase in the effectiveness of the
attack ; scaling up by too large a factor could lead to the quantities required
for injection becoming unmanageable.
6. With the typhoid bacillus used as the contaminating agent, no
symptoms would become apparent during the incubation period of several
days, hence there would be no warning to throw suspicion on the water
quality.
With botulinal toxin or LSD, consumers would first experience symptoms 8 hours (botulism) or 2 hours (LSD) after drinking an effective dose.
Assuming that the symptoms were recognized as such and the waterworks
authorities were prepared for emergency action, this would enable them
to take immediate action to warn people not to drink the water, to flush
ciut and swab the mains, and to take other actions, such as superchlorination, which would soon put an end to the spreading of the agent.
114

7. Two types of consumption pattern have been postulated. One is for
an industrialized community in a temperate climate, and the other for an
arid tropical area with little industry. The patterns have been based upon
known demand curves, modified by assumptions as to mixing, dilution,
storage capacity, and drinking habits. In the first community, it is assumed
that during the relevant period there will be 15% of people who will not
drink mains water ; in the second case it is assumed that practically the
whole of the population will do so within 3 or 4 days. Only water drunk
as taken from the tap has been considered, and no allowance has been
made for water consumed in food or hot beverages.

CONTAMINATION BY THE TYPHOID BACILLUS
Basic data
It is assumed that 1 kg of freeze-dried typhoid culture, contammg
8 x 1010 organisms in 0.6 g is used, i.e., 13.3 )< 1013 organisms are injected
during a period of 24 hours or more.
Because of die-off upon entering the mains, unequal distribution, dilution, and other factors, the effectiveness of the culture has been assumed
to be reduced by 95%. Thus, of the 13.3 x 1013 organisms injected,
6.65 X 1012 will actually reach consumers' premises.
Table 11 shows the percentages of persons becoming infected after
ingesting a specific dose : these figures are based on challenge trials in human
volunteers (Hornick & Woodward, 1966).1
TABLE 11. PROPORTION OF PERSONS INFECTED
AFTER INGESTING TYPHOID BACILLI

Number of viable S. typhosa

I Number of persons with typhoid I
Number challenged

10 9
10 8
10 7
10 5
103

40/42
8/9
16/32
32/116
0/20

Persons infected
(%)

95
89
50
28
0

Case I. Large city, industrialized society, temperate climate. Water
supply: 400 litres per person per day; amount drunk raw per person:
0.5 litre.
1

Hornick, R. B. &

~Woodward,

T. E. (1966) Trans Amer. clin. climatol. Ass., 78,

70-76.

115

The total number of typhoid cases under these conditions would be
about 35 000. Assuming a fatality rate of 0.6% (given early and adequate
antibiotic treatment), some 200 of these would die.
Case 2. Large city, non-industrialized society, hot arid climate. Water
supply : 100 litres per person per day ; amount drunk raw per person:
2.0 litres.
In this case, a much higher proportion of the water delivered is actually
drunk-one fiftieth as compared with one eight-hundredth in Case 1.
Injection of the same quantity of material would provide an average dosage
of 105 organisms to 133 000 people, 95% of whom would drink infected
water during the period.
If no facilities for mass treatment were available, the fatality rate would
be expected to reach 10%, or 4 500 people.

CONTAMINATION BY BOTULINAL TOXIN, TYPE A

In making the following projection of the hypothetical use of botulinal
toxin, it should be borne in mind that we have no information as to the
possible inactivation of this toxin in the water during a period of 6-8 hours
in the mains. Oxidation or other denaturing action could reduce very
considerably the effects calculated. Further research might result in a
stable toxin suitable for use in the manner described below, if such a toxin
is not already available.
Basic data

The lethal dose per person (by ingestion) has been taken as l,ug. The
first symptoms have been assumed to appear within 6-8 hours of ingestion.
Case 1. Urban community of 50 000 people. Industrialized society,
temperate climate. Water supply: 400 litres per person per day; amount
drunk raw per person: 0.5 litre.
The theoretical dose needed in 20 million litres, assuming perfect distribution and equal dilution, is 0.04 kg. Allowing a factor of X 6 for unequal
distribution, dilution, etc., the quantity required will be 0.24 kg.
Injection could be spread over 6 hours (midnight to 06.00 hours) but
would cease before the first symptoms became apparent. The initial concentration on entering the mains would be 0.05 mg/litre, at which rate 20 g
of water would carry a lethal dose.
At 17.30 hours, 10% of the population would have received a lethal
dose 8 hours earlier; if remedial measures were taken at that time, 60%
of the consumers would already have received a lethal dose (30 000 people).
Recognition of symptoms one hour earlier, at 16.30 hours, when 1 200
116

people would be exhibiting symptoms, would reduce the number who had
by that time ingested a lethal dose to about 28 000 people .

. Case 2. Urban community of 50 000 people, non-industrialized society,
hut arid climate. Water supply: 100 litres per person per day; amount
drunk raw per person: 2.0 litres.
The theoretical dose needed in 5 million litres, assuming perfect distribution, is 0.0025 kg. Allowing a factor of x 6 for unequal distribution,
etc., as in Case 1, the quantity required for injection will be 0.015 kg.
Again assuming that the injection is spread over 6 hours, the initial concentration on entering the mains would be 0.012 mgjlitre, at which rate 80 g
of water would carry a lethal dose.
At 17.30 hours 10% of the population would have received a lethal dose
8 hours earlier; if preventive measures were taken at that time, 55%
(27 500 persons) would already be affected.
Recognition of symptoms one hour earlier at 16.30 hours, when 5% of
the population were beginning to show symptoms, would reduce this
proportion to 50% (25 000 people).
On the other hand, delay in recognition until 18.30 hours would mean
that 65%, or 32 500 people, would already have consumed a lethal dose.
Note:
Case 1-and Case 2 describe the probable pattern in towns with populations of 50 000 but with different characteristics. Similar patterns would be
expected in limited sectors oflarger cities having comparable water consumption patterns.
CONTAMINATION WITH LSD

Basic data
The individual dose (by ingestion) needed to produce incapacity has
been taken as 250 f.lg. The lethal dose has not yet been adequately determined, but it would seem certain that deaths would result from the consumption of concentrated doses in water withdrawn at short distances from
the point of injection of the agent into the mains.
The first symptoms have been assumed to appear within 2 hours of
ingestion.
Case 1.1 Urban community of 50 000 people. Industrialized society,
temperate climate. Water supply: 400 litres per person per day; amount
drunk raw per person: 0.5 litre.
The theoretical incapacitating dose needed in 20 million Iitres of water,
assuming perfect distribution and equal dilution is 10 kg. Injection would
1

See note above at end of section on contamination by botulinal toxin.

117

be over one hour, so that it would have been completed before the first
symptoms became apparent.
Allowing a factor of X 8 for unequal distribution, dilution, etc. (bearing
'mind the short period over which injection must take place), the quantity
required would be 80 kg.
The initial concentration would be 100 mgjlitre, at which rate 2.5 g of
water would carry an incapacitating dose.
At 11.15 hours 10% of the population would have drunk contaminated
water 2 hours earlier, and of these some would have ingested a lethal dose.
If symptoms were recognized and preventive measures taken immediately,
25% of the pcJpulation would already have been affected (12 500 people).
R~cognition of the symptoms by 10.30 hours, when 5% of the popula-

in

TABLE 12. POSSIBLE EFFECTS OF LIMITED SABOTAGE
OF CITY COMMUNAL WATER SUPPLY*
Number of casualties

Agent

Quantities
pf agent
required a

0.24
Botulinal toxin (if in
stable form)

LSD

Deaths
Population
at risk

kg

50 000

0.015 kg

50 000

80 kg

50 000

5 kg

50 000

Economically
developed
country b
28 000 d
30 000 e
40 ooo I

'

In determioate
number

I

Incapacitated
(includes deaths)

EcoDeveloping nomically
country c developed
country b

25 000 d
28 000 e
48 ooo I
In determinate
number

10 000 d
13 000 e
40 000 t

'
Typhoid bacillus

1 kg

400 000
to
500 000

200

I

Developing
country c

t 500
to
4 500 g

35 000

14 000 d
19 000 e
48 ooo I

45 000

* See text for descriptions of procedures.

a The differences in the quantities required r~flect differences in cons~mptipn of water in
temperate and hot climates.
b Temperate climate.
c Hot climate.
d If recognized when 5% of the population started showing symptoms and if remedial action
started Immediately.
e If re!=ognized when 10% of the population started showing symptoms and if remedial action
started immediately.
t If no remedial action were taken within 24 hours.
g According to treatment facilities. available.

118

tion hqd drunk the contaminated water 2 hours earlier, would reduce the
proportion already affected to 20% or 10 000 people.
Case 2. 1 Urban community of 50 000, non-industrialized society, hot
arid climate. Water supply: 100 litres per person per day; amount drunk
raw per person: 2.0 litres.
The theoretical dose needed in 5 million litres, assuming perfect distri·
bution is 0.625 kg.
Allowing a factor x 8 for unequal distribution, etc., the quantity
required would be 5 kg injected over one hour.
The initial concentration on entering the mains would be 25 mgjlitre,
at which rate 10 g of water would carry an incapacitating dose.
At 11.30 hours, 10% ofthe population would have drunk contaminated.
water 2 hours earlier, and some of these would have ingested a letha1 dose.
If symptoms were recognized and preventive measures taken immediately,
some 37% (18 500 people) would have already been affected.
Recognition of the symptoms at 10.30 hours, when 5% of the population had drunk contaminated water 2 hours earlier, would reduce this
proportion to about 27% (13 500 people).
On the other hand, delay in recognition until 12.30 hours would mean
that 40% (20 000 people) would be affected, some of them fatally.
If the symptoms remained unrecognized and no remedial action were
taken within 24 hours, almost the entire population at risk would be affected
(say, 47 500 persons).

PREVENTIVE MEASURES

Although no waterworks can be completely proof against attack by an
enemy agent who has the necessary knowledge, time and resources, there
are measures that can be taken to minimize the extent of the area affected
and to increase the chances of early detection. The measures taken to
protect against an act of" casual " sabotage by an individual, would in
many cases be the same as those for protection against natural or accidental hazards. They include the following:
1. A thorough study of the entire system should be made to identify
points at which a saboteur could do the maximum harm, i.e., places
where the water is accessible and points where injection could introduce
a contaminant into trunk or transmission mains.
2. The normal treatment processes of coagulation, sedimentation, filtration and chlorination will be effective to a greater or lesser extent against
most contaminants, though they cannot be relied upon to be completely
1

See note at end of section on contamination by botulinal toxin (page 117).

119

effective in every case. Chlorination is probably the most significant stage
of treatment, and the disappearance of a chlorine residual that is normally
maintained throughout the mains system can provide a rapid warning of
organic contamination if regula,r tests at different points are made.
3. Service reservoirs or high-level distribution tanks should always be
locked against casual access and regularly inspected for evidence of tampering.
4. Non-return valves should be fitted to services taken directly from
trunk mains and, if possible, to all service connexions.
5. Valves or other means should be used to ensure that only one sector
of the distribution system can be affected from a single injection point.
The most vulnerable type of distribution system is one that provides water
on an intermittent basis, with intervening periods of low or negative pressure ; every endeavour should be made to maintain a positive pressure in
all mains at all times.
·
6. Close liaison should be maintained between the authorities responsible.
for the water supplies and the health authorities so that any case. of sickness
or other .circumstances that might throw the slightest suspicion upon the
water supply as· a vehicle for a contaminating agent would immediately b~
brought to the attention of the engineer in charge for appropriate action.
Such action would include identification. of the area involved ; warning of
the public against drinking the water ; the flushing to waste of the content
of all mains, followed by swabbing with polyurethane foam cylinders and
superchlorination ; and increase of chlorine residual throughout the whole
system.
7. Activated carbon and/or ozone should be used in the treatment
works-an expensive form of treatment but effective (in conjunction with
chlorination) against nearly every contaminating agent. If this is impracticable for the whole supply, it may be considered worth while for key ·
points, e.g., hospitals, or for mineral water or food factories where contamination might be continued in another form subsequent to its elimination
from the mains.

120

ANNEX 6

PSYCHOSOCIAL CONSEQUENCES
OF CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS*
INTRODUCTION

Discussion of the public health or medical effects of chemical or biological weapons would be incomplete without consideration of the psychological and social effects of their development, stockpiling, or use. Analysis
of these effects is extremely difficult and so far little has been published in
this field. 1 A considerable amount of research has, however, been conducted
on the psychosocial consequences of preparation for or actual engagement
in nuclear warfare (Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry, 1964;
Frank, 1967; Liederman & Mendelson, 1963), and many of the findings
are relevant to the problems posed by chemical and biological weapons.
This annex is limited to a brief consideration of some of the most relevant
factors and suggests avenues for further study of the psychosocial· consequences of chemical and biological warfare. Considerable research is
needed ; this should be carried out by a special study group that would
collect and interpret existing information and gather additional data.
Although a decision to develop chemical and biological weapons may
seem justifiable on the basis of apparently rational considerations of national
security and national self-interest, a great deal of irrationality enters into it.
However, an exploration of the irrationality is beyond the scope of this
annex, which has been somewhat artificially divided into reactions to the
threat of warfare with chemical and biological weapons and reactions to
their actual use. Preparations for chemical and biological warfare may be
viewed as representing in themselves a response to the threat of enemy
attack. However, they serve equally to induce and intensify widespread
fears and anxieties, with their accompanying psychological defences of

* This annex was prepared at WHO's request by an independent group of specialists
.co-ordinated by Dr Viola W. Bernard, Direct()!', Division of Community and. Social
Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York, USA, and this group is solely responsible
for the views expressed.
1 An analysis entitled Social and psychological aspects of CW was prepared for the
.
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) in July 1968 by John Cohen,
c()epartment of Psychology, University of Manchester, England (unpublished document,
available on request from SIPRI).
121

projection, denial and dehumanization. These reactions not only constitute
psychosocial consequences of chemical and biological warfare but may
also increase the risk of its occurrence through the mechanism of selffulfilling prophecy. Reactions of this kind have already begun, so that
appropriate systematic studies can and should be undertaken immediately.
The psychosocial consequences of the actual use of chemical and biological weapons are of necessity less amenable to direct study, but research
designs and methodologies can be based on the already documented observations and studies of the psychosocial consequences of nuclear attack,
attack by other weapon systems, and disasters involving large population
groups.

POSSIBLE PSYCHOSOCIAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE
TflREAT OF CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL WARFARE

1. Anxiety and fear 1
The implication of the decision to develop chemical and biological
weapons is. that they will ultimately be used, for reasons not now ascertainable, at a time now unknown, either on or by those preparing to use them.
It is assumed in this discussion that these weapons do in fact pose aQ.
awesome threat to man's survival, and that therefore the possibility of their
use engenders real feelings of danger in everyone. As in most dangerous
and threatening situations, both anxiety and tear are mobilized.
Although within certain limits fear may fulfil an adaptive function
by motivating an individual to avoid or to overcome impending danger, it
can often be maladaptive, leading to short-sighted and/or unrealistic
behaviour in the single-minded pursuit of an immediate sense of personal
safety, no matter how illusory. Fear may lead to an inability to distinguish
between the consequences of various types of weapons or of different modes
of attack. Rational discussion of methods for prevention will then be
1 A psychiatric glossary (Washington, American Psychiatric Association, 1964)
defines anxiety and fear as follows :
Anxiety : Apprehension, tension or uneasiness which stems from the anticipation of
danger, the source of 'which is largely unknown or unrecognized. Primarily of intra~
psychic origin, in distinction to fear, which is the emotional response to a consciously
recognized and usually external threat or danger. Anxiety and fear are accompanied by
similar physiologic changes. May be regarded as pathologic when present to such extent
as to interfere with effectiveness in living, achievement of desired goals or satisfactions,
or reasonable emotional comfort (p. 13).
Fear : Nbrmal emotional response to consciously recognized and external sources of
danger, to be distinguished from anxiety (p. 32).

122

impossible. Fear may cause withdrawal, immobility, or functional paral~
ysis; for example, several studies of stress phenomena have described the
retreat into sleep of a threatened organism (Engel, 1962).
Conversely, fear may lead to impulsive or habitual reactions constituting
an inappropriate response to the specific danger. For example, although
the launching of a widespread immunization campaign against a specific
organism may be a reasonable response to the danger posed by a'naturally
occurring epidemic, it may be completely unreasonable in a situation in
which it is extremely likely that such an immunization programme would
lead to an enemy's selecting a different organism for an attack. Moreover,
even if an enemy chose to use the same organism, it is not at all certain that
an immunization programme would be at all worth the very marginal protection that might be conferred in the face of the overwhelming doses of the
agent that would be employed by an attacker : a more primitive and immediate mass reaction might be precipitate flight from a dangerous area, even
though the danger was really over. Furthermore, the development' of
chemical or biological weapons, whatever the underlying national policies,
can lead to a national and foreign policy that is actually based on the fears
and self-defeating defences against them.
A powerful source of anxiety is lack of perceptual clarity in the face. of
apparent danger. Many chemical and all biological weapons are undetectable by the senses, so that there are no warning signs to enable the person
attacked to protect himself. Additional uncertainties with biological weapons are the latent periods between infection and illness and the unpredictability of spread through the community. As a result, a person may fear
that if he is exposed to these weapons he will not know for certain when he
has been infected, how ill he will be, or when the danger has passed~ A
further confusing factor is that many of the symptoms of illness, especially
those involving the gastrointestinal tract, are also symptoms of emotional
stress. Thus, if a person develops nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea, he may
still not be sure whether he has been infected or not.
Certain specific features of chemical and biological weapons, such as
their invisibility and modes of action, are particularly likely to revive and
intensify anxieties, fantasies and conflicts dating back to childhood which,
although outgrown by many people, often remain burit.d in the irrational
depths of the mind. Under certain types of stress external and internal
threats may merge and the individual's overt behaviour become dominated
or distorted by the irrationality that is linked to such anxieties and to the
attempt to defend himself against them.
2. Defences against anxiety and fear

Several mechanisms of defence are prominent in man's reaction to the
threats posed by chemical and biological warfare.
123

(i) Projection and rationalization

The fear of being attacked and destroyed can engender reactive urges to
exterminate potential attackers by any possible means. Scruples against
using chemical and biological weapons against other human beings can be
overcome if this fear-engendered impulse to exterminate " the enemy " is
projected on to him. For if it is " they " who are about to destroy " us "
by such diabolic weapons, then "we", through rationalization, can feel
justified in resorting to these weapons. " They " and" we " vary, of course,
with the nationality of those who make use of these universal mental mechanisms. But whatever the population, such psychological defences increase
rather than decrease the actual risk of what is feared, and hence are selfdefeating.
Preparing for chemical and biological warfare increases the danger that
stockpiled supplies of lethal matedals may be disseminated accidentally or
deliberately. Furthermore, such preparation in any one country stimulates
preparation in other countries by giving credibility to the fears of those
who also react to the fear of annihilation with a justification of chemical and
biological warfare. Thus, reciprocal fears between nations, and the projeciton and rationalization to which they give rise in defence, contribute to
the spiralling of a chemical and biological weapons race that imperils all
mankind.
Also, as Dr Jerome B. Wiesner 1 has pointed out, the secrecy that a
number of nations with large-scale resources impose on the means
whereby they seek to buy security in the nuclear age. (a goal Wiesner
views as technically unachievable) requires each person "to guess what
he is likely to face technologically and militarily a few years ahead. Our
best guesses are based on what each of. us is doing, because these give
us the images which we project to the future; The consequence, particularly
for the United States, is that we are running an arms race with ourselves,
and very frequently the threats that we see five years ahead, for example, are
the threats that we ourselves pose." (Wiesner, 1969).
(ii) Denial
This is a "term applied to the various degrees of non-perception, misperception,. non-recognition, non-understanding, or non-acceptance of
certain realities in order to cope with otherwise unacceptable intra-psychic
conflicts, feelings, or memories " (Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry,
1964). People also resort unconsciously to denial as a reaction to threats
that they feel unable to cope with. Such denial in turn detracts from and
1 Provost of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and former science adviser
to Presidents Kennedy and Johnson.

124

inhibits their potential ability to resolve problems realistically. With respect
to chemical and biological warfare, the difficulty of facing the massive and
unprecedented nature of the threat may be so great that many people simply
choose to ignore its existence. Or the threat may be so difficult to bear
that it is met only by " it can't happen to me " or " it can't happen to us ".
Another aspect, perhaps not strictly within the concept of denial, is
failure to comprehend the consequences of an event that not only has never
been personally experienced but is unimaginable because of its extraordinary
magnitude. For example, although the epidemic of plague called the Black
Death caused the death of half the population of certain parts of Europe
in the 14th century, the concept of the death of half the population of a
modern city is inconceivable in all its dimensions and consequences and thus
may have no psychological meaning for most people.
(iii) Dehumanization
The term " dehumanization " has been used to cover two separate but
related phenomena both employed as a psychological defence against
various anxieties. These phenomena are (1) object-directed dehumanization
and (2) self-directed dehumanization.
Object-directed dehumanization is " the tendency to view other individuals or groups as though they do not quite belong to the ' human race ' ".
There are circumstances in which such dehumanization serves as a useful
protective device enabling individuals to function effectively under stress,
as in certain occupations and in rescue operations. Such a process of dehumanization, however, can often be extremely maladaptive and socially
dangerous. In the case of chemical and biological warfare, for example,
it may lead to preoccupation with the statistical aspects of morbidity and
mortality caused by weapons, with relatively little concern for their consequences in human terms.
Self-directed dehumanization, which may also be increased by preparation for chemical and biological warfare, includes diminution of the sense
of personal responsibility for one's own actions, as well as feelings of powerlessness and of inability to question or to affect the course of events.
As described in detail by Bernard et al. (1965) and summarized by the
Committee on Social Issues of the Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry
(1964) in its report on " Psychiatric aspects of the prevention of nuclear
war ", there is an increasing tendency towards dehumanization as a response
to many facets of modern life. Certain features of the preparations for
nuclear war are particularly conducive to this reaction. In turn, dehumanization may increase the risk of nuclear warfare by inhibiting some of the
psychological deterrents to it. This tendency toward dehumanization is
likely to be further accelerated by preparations for chemical and biological
warfare because of the specific characteristics of this kind of warfare.
125

POSSffiLE PSYCHOSOCIAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE USE
OF CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
1. Panic
Maladaptive reactions to the nuclear attacks on Hiroshim;:~, an!f Nagasaki
have been described (Nagai,~1951). ·Panic after the use of chemical or biolo"
gical weapons may be so great that those agents which might be useful in the
control of certain consequences of the attack-such as atropine OJ.".antibiotics
-will.not be used effectively. Panic may also cause individuals to flee from
the area of attack, even when there is no longer any danger of exposure, thus
making it almost impossible either to bring personnel or material intQ the
city to help cope with the casualties or to evacuate those affected,
2. Fear of those affected
From the attempt by the rest of the population to isolate the victims of
the attack on Hiroshima and Nagasaki (Lifton, 1967), although there was
no danger that the affected would injure the unaffected, it may be .expected
that in a biological attack the unaffected will view the affected as potential
agents of the spread of the disease. Not only will the obviously sick be
suspect but so also will those who might become sick or might be using
health care resources for other reasons. Analogous instances to those in
which people said they would shoot anyone who tried to force his way
into a fall-out shelter (Sidel et al., 1963) may be found among those who
might attack others attempting to gain access to scarce supplies of antibiotics or food.
3. Changes in social organization
The response to a chemical or biological attack may require mobilization
of resources, evacuation, or immunization on such a scale that extraordinary
means of social control will have to be introduced. Once this has been done,
it may .be very difficult to relax the control. Thus the introduction of
chemical and biological weapons may lead to profound social changes out
of proportion to the amount of death or disability caused by the agent
directly. In addition, an attack on a city with chemical or biological weapons
would probably cause a breakdown of communications, transport, sanitation, and food distribution, thus further endangering the lives of many .not
directly affected by the agents themselves.
·
4. Special consequences of specific agents
Many of the specific chemical and biological agents raise special problems. For example, in a report on tests of a hallucinogen on a group of
soldiers, it was reported that " the troops exposed to one of these agents
126

were not even conscious of their abnormal condition which was so changed
that they were unable to follow simple commands and perform normal
tasks with acceptable accuracy. Only an outsider not exposed and coming
upon them would recognize their behaviour as eccentric" (Rothschild, 1964)
(see also Annex 1, p. 47). It is thus impossible to predict the effect of such
irrational behaviour on a battle or on a war, particularly in situations
involving the use of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons in which a
rational opponent is being counted on not to escalate beyond given limits
without provocation. Equally impossible to predict are the long-term
effects of the presence of a potentially large group of people who have
suffered irreversible brain damage as a result of use of one of the chemical
agents (e.g., anoxia secondary to the use of nerve agents) or of one of the
biological agents causing encephalitis.

CONCLUSION

This discussion briefly highlights some of the psychosocial risks and
consequences of a decision to develop chemical and biological weapons.
It is apparent that reciprocal fears between nations and the various defensive
measures to which they give rise contribute to the intensification of the arms
race-whether nuclear, chemical or biological. Although stockpiles of
chemical and biological weapons may have been maintained only to " deter "
the" enemy", those in control of such weapons may use them in retaliation
against an attack or to forestall what they have become convinced will be
a certain and lethal attack.
Appropriate systematic studies of these and other related phenomena can
and should be undertaken immediately so that there is greater awareness
of and control over the irrational forces that interfere with and at times
make impossible rational solutions to conflicts between peoples.

REFERENCES
Bernard, V. W., Ottenberg, P. & Red!, F. (1965) Dehumanization: A barrier to reducing
international tensions. In: Schwebel, M., ed., Behavioral science and human survival,
Palo Alto, Science and Behavior Books
Engel, G. (1962) Psychological development in health and disease, Philadelphia, Saunders
Frank, J. (1967) Sanity and survival, New York, Random House
Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry, Committee on Social Issues (1964) Psychiatric
aspects of the prevention of nuclear war, New York, Group for the Advancement of
Psychiatry (Report No. 57)
Liederman, P. H. & Mendelson, J. H. (1963) Some psychiatric considerations in planning
· for defense shelters. In: Aranow, S., Ervin, F. & Side!, V. W., ed., The fallen sky:
medical consequences of thermonuclear war, New York, Hill & \Vang, pages 42-54

127

Lifton, R. J. (1967) Death in life: survivors of Hiroshima, New York, Random House
Nagai, T. (195t) We of Nagasaki: The story of survivors in an atomic wasteland, translated by I. Shirato & H. B. L. Silverman, New York, Duell
Rothschild, J. H. (1964) Tomorrow's weapons, chemical and biological, New York,
McGraw-Hill, page 39
Sidel, V. W., Geiger, H. J. & Lown, B. (1963) The physician's role in the post-attack
period. In: Aranow, S., Ervin, F. & Sidel, V. W., ed., The fallen sky: medical
consequences of thermonuclear war, New York, Hill & Wang, pages 21-41
Wiesner, J. B. (1969) The hawks attack a dove. Industrial Research, July, pages 44-45.

't•.

128

ANNEX 7

RESOLUTION 2454 A (XXIII) OF THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
OF THE UNITED NATIONS
Question of General and Complete Disarmament

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the recommendations contained in its resolution 2162 B
(XXI) of 5 December 1966 calling for strict observance by all States of the
principles and objectives of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in
War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925,1 condemning all
actions contrary to those objectives and inviting all States to accede to that
Protocol,
Considering that the possibility of the use of chemical and bacteriological
weapons constitutes a serious threat to mankind,
Believing that the people of the world should be. made aware of the
consequences of the use of chemical and bacteriological weapons,
Having considered the report of the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament which recommended that the SecretaryGeneral should appoint a group of experts to study the effects of the possible
use of such weapons, 2
Noting the interest in a report on various aspects of the problem of
chemical,· bacteriological and other biological weapons which has been
expressed by many Governments and the welcome given to the recommendation of the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament by the Secretary-General in the introduction to his annual report on

1

League of Nations, Treary Series, Yo!. XCIV (1929), No. 2138.
See Official Records of tlze Disarmament Commission, Supplement for 1967 and
1968, document DC/231, para. 26.
·
2

129

the work of the. Organization submitted to the General Assembly at its
twenty-third session,!
Believing that such a study would provide a valuable contribution to the
consideration by the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on
Disarmament of the problems connect~d with chemical and bacteriological
weapons,
Recalling the value of the report of the Secretary-General on the effects
of the possible use of nuclear weapons, 2

1. REQUESTS the Secretary General to prepare a concise report in accordance with the proposal contained in paragraph 32 of the introduction to his
annual report on the work of the Organization submitted to the General
Assembly at its twenty-third session and in accordance with the recommendation of the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament contained in paragraph 26 of its report ;
2. RECOMMENDS that the report should be based on accessible material and
prepared with the assistance of qualified consultant experts appointed by the
Secretary-General, taking into account the views expressed and the suggestions m~;tde during the discussion of this item at the twenty-third session of
the General Assembly ;
·
3. CALLS UPON Governments, national and international scientific institutions and organizations to co-operate with the Secretary-General in the
preparation of the report ;
4. REQUESTS that the report be transmitted to the Conference of the
Eighteen-Nation Committee on. Disarmament, the Security Council and
the General Assembly at an early date, if possible by 1 July 1969, and to
the Governments of Member States in time to permit its consideration at
the twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly ;
5. RECOMMENDS that Governments should give the report wide distribution
in their respective languages, through various media of communication, so
as to acquaint public opinion with its contents ;
6. REITERATES its call for strict observance by all States of the principles
and objectives of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of
Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods
of Warfare signed at Geneva on 17. June 1925, and invites all States to
accede to that Protocol.
1750thplenary meeting, 20 December 1968.
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-third Session, Supplement
No. JA (A/7201/Add. l), para. 32.
·
2 Effects of the Possible ·Use of Nuclear Weapons and the Security and Econ~mic
Implications for States of ,the Acquisition and Further Development of These Weapons
(United Nations publication, Sales No. : E.68.IX.l).

130

ANNEX 8

RESOLUTION WHA20.54 OF THE
TWENTIETH WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY
Consideration of Resolution 2162 (XXI) of the General Assembly of the
United Nations: Question of General and Complete Disarmament

The Twentieth World Health Assembly,
Having considered resolution 2162 (XXI) of the United Nations General
Assembly which notes in particular that weapons of mass destruction
constitute a: danger to all mankind and that strict observance of the rules
of intei:national1aw on the conduct of warfare is in the interest of maintaining the accepted norms of civilization ; and which calls upon all States to
accede to the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare,
signeq ,at Geneva on 17 June 1925, and to observe strictly the principles
and aims of the Protocol ;
Guided by the aims and principles of the Constitution of the World
Health Organization, and proceeding from the humane nature of both the
Organization and the medical profession in general ;
Referring to resolutions WHA11.31 and WHA15.51, in which the
World Health Assembly already expressed its thorough interest in the
consolidation of peace as an inalienable prerequisite for preservation and
improvem~nt of the health of all nations ; and
Deeply convinced that the scientific achievements, and particularly in
the field of biology and medicine-that most humane science-should be
used only for mankind's benefit, but never to do it any harm,
1. WELCOMES resolution 2162 (XXI) of the United Nations General Assembly; and
2. CALLS UPON all Member States to exert every effort to implement the
above-mentioned resolution.
Twelfth plenary meeting, 25 May 1967.
(Committee on Programme and Budget, ninth report.)
131

ANNEX 9

RESOLUTION WHA22.58 OF THE
TWENTY-SECOND WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY
Question of General and Complete Disarmament : Chemical and
Bacteriological (Biological) Weapons and the Consequences of their
Possible Use
c

The Twenty-second World

He~,tAsse~bly,

Having considered the report of the Director-General on co-ord~nation
with the United Nations, the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency ;
Noting with satisfaction resolution 2454 A (XXIII) of the General
Assembly of the United Nations ;
Recalling resolution WHA 20.54 of the Twentieth World Health
Assembly ; and
·
Convinced of the necessity of achieving a rapid international agreement
for the complete prohibition and disposal of all types of chemical and
bactetiological (biological) weapons under an effective system of controls
which will ensure full compliance by all parties,
I. THANKS the Director-General for his efforts in participating in the preparation of the report of the Secretary-General of the United N~ttions on
the question of chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons and the
consequences of their possible use; and

2. REQUESTS the Director-General. to continue his co-operation with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations in the further study of this question.

Fourteenth plenary meeting, 25 July 1969.
(Committee on Programme and Budget, seventh report.)

-~--_132__

_ _ _ _ ~~~~-


